IN THE SUP
REME COURT  OF THE STATE OF WASHINGTON  
KERRY L. ERICKSON ET AL.,  
       Petitioners , 
v. 
PHARMACI
A LLC , 
 Respo
ndent .   NO.  103135-1 
  EN BANC  
  Filed: October 3
0, 2025  
STEPHENS,
 C.J.— Three public school teachers got sick after working in an 
old school building containing polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) made by 
Monsanto.  They sued Monsanto’s successor -in-interest, Pharmacia, and received a 
jury verdict for  compensatory and punitive damages following an extensive trial 
with dozens of expert witnesses.  The Court of Appeals reversed and remanded for 
a new trial, finding error in pretrial rulings regarding the applicable choice of law. Specifically, it found that the trial court erred by applying the Washington p roduct 
liability act (WPLA), ch. 7.72 RCW,  to assess Pharmacia’s liability while at the 
same time applying Missouri’s law on repose rather than the WPLA’s repose 
provision.  It affirmed the application of Missouri law to punitive damages but held 
FILE 
IN CLERK’S OFFICE 
SUPREME COURT, STATE OF WASHINGTON 
OCTOBER 30, 2025
THIS OPINION WAS FILED 
FOR RECORD AT 8 A.M. ON 
OCTOBER 30, 2025
SARAH R. PENDLETON  
SUPREME COURT CLERK 


Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
2 that the trial court erred in  using a verdict form that did not limit damages to claims 
recognized under Missouri law.  The court  also found error  in the trial court’s 
admission of certain expert testimony.  
We granted review and now partially revers e the Court of Appeals.  We 
conclude that the Court of Appeals erred by failing to apply the choice of law 
principles established over 50 years ago in Johnson v. Spider Staging  Corp. , 87 
Wn.2d 577, 555 P.2d 997 (1976) .  Where the laws of interested states conflict—
including between the WPLA and Missouri common law —we apply the law of the 
state with the most significant relationship to that issue.  Applying those principles 
here, we hold that Missouri has the most significant relationship to the  issues of 
repose and punitive damages  and therefore  Missouri law governs both.  We also  hold 
that the jury was not required to identify the  specific theories of liability recognized 
by Missouri law that supported an award of punitive damages , and that the jury 
instructions and the special verdict form are sufficient to sustain  the punitive 
damages award .  Finally, we hold that  the expert testimony of industrial hygienist  
Kevin Coghlan, which estimat ed the historic levels of PC Bs present at the time the 
teachers worked at the school, was  based on generally accepted methodology that 
satisfies the standards for admissibility under Frye v. United States , 54 App. D.C. 
46, 293 F. 1013 (1923 ), and ER 702 .  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
3 FACTUAL BACKGROUND  AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
Relevant facts are drawn from the trial record and the briefing. W e begin with 
a general overview of PCBs  and their use in school buildings  and then describe how 
this product liability lawsuit originated and progressed through the trial court and 
the Court of Appeals, framing  the issues now before us for review.   
History of PCBs, Monsanto, and Pharmacia LLC  
In 1929, the Swann Chemical Company invented a family of chemicals called 
polychlorinated biphenyls , commonly known as PCBs .  Considered groundbreaking 
at the time, PCBs enhanced flexibility and durability in products like caulks and 
paints, and their resistance to burning an d good insulating properties made them 
ideal for use as coolants and lubricants in tran sformers, capacitors, and other 
electrical equipment. PCBs quickly became an industry standard for electrical 
companies such as  General Electric.    
In 1935, Monsanto Company, based in St. Louis, Missouri, purchased Swann 
Chemical Company and began making and selling PCBs.  Monsanto manufactured 
PCBs at two production facilities, one in Alabama and the other in Illinois.  Its 
primary corporate business operations, including sales, marketing, public relations, 
and advertising, were based at its headquarters in St. Louis.  The company’s medical 
department, which was responsible for overseeing research into the potential hazards 
of PCBs, was also located i n St. Louis.   

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
4 Scientists, including those at Monsanto,  gradually began to discover the 
harmful effects of PCBs .  Toxicological testing conducted by Monsanto as early as 
the 1930s confirmed that exposure to PCBs, whether through vapors or skin contact, 
posed risks of systemic toxic effects.  In 1966, Swedish scientists learned that PCBs 
remain in the environment  and cause  harm to fish and wildlife.   In 1970, Monsanto 
began phasing out the sale  of PCBs  for use in certain applications.  By 1972, the 
company restricted its P CB sales to use in electrical fluids, and by 1977, it ceased 
PCB production entirely.  In  1979, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) 
officially banned the manufacture, processing, and sale of PCBs in the United States  
after identifying their severe toxic  effects on humans and wildlife .  See 
Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) Manufacturing, Processing, Distribution in Commerce, and Use Prohibitions, 40 CFR Part 761 ; Env’t Def. Fund, Inc. v. Env ’t 
Prot. Agency , 205 U.S. App. D.C. 139, 636 F.2d 1267, 1270  (1980) . 
Through a series of transactions in the late 1990s, Monsanto reorganized into 
three separation corporations, each responsible for a different industry.  The entity 
now known as Monsanto Company manages the agricultural products business,  and 
Solutia Inc. assumed  its chemical products business.  Pharmacia retained the 
pharmaceutical business and is the successor -in-interest to the original Monsanto 
Company.  
 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
5 Sky Valley Education Center 
The school buildings  at issue  in this case  were built between  1967  and 19 68, 
during a time when PCBs were commonly used in caulking and light ballasts.  Over 
the following 50 years, the Monroe School District (MSD) used the buildings as a  
high school, junior high school, middle school, and since 2011,  as the home of the 
K-12 Sky Valley Education Center (SVEC).  During the 1990s and the early 2000s, 
the EPA and other public health organizations distributed information to school 
districts , warning about the presence of PCBs in light ballasts.  By 2000, MSD was 
aware that many of the light fixtures in  the Monroe m iddle school  buildings 
contained PCBs, that PCBs posed a hazard to people in the buildings, and that special 
care was required to re move light ballasts to avoid risks from  exposure.  In 2007, 
MSD received a report that the school’s deterioration was worse than any other 
school within  the district and that the buildings were in critical need of renovation.  
Despite this, when the middle school  relocated to a new building in 2011, MSD 
moved SVEC into the old buildings.     
Teachers and students at SVEC began reporting a range of health concerns, 
including headaches, rashes, fatigue, blurred vision, and memory, sinus, and 
respiratory issues.  The teachers reported that their symptoms seemed to improve when they spent time away from the school buildings yet return ed upon reentering 
them .  Starting in 2014, the school began a two -year project to clean and repair light 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
6 fixtures, replace light ballasts, remove carpet, and improve ventilation.  There was 
no effort to measure PCBs at SVEC until 2016, after remediation efforts began and 
PCB -containing light ballasts were removed. Upon finding that PCB levels exceeded 
federal limits, the EPA, along with state and local agencies, worked with MSD on a 
PCB remediation and monitoring plan.   
Procedural History  
In May 2018, several SVEC teachers and students filed suit against all three 
of Monsanto’s successor corporations, MSD, Union High School District, and Snohomish Health District, alleging injuries from PCB exposure.  The plaintiffs in 
this case include three former teachers, Kerry Erickson, Michelle Leahy, and Joyce Marquardt,  who taught at SVEC in the  old middle school  buildings between 2011 
and 2016 , and retired as a result of their declining health.  The plaintiffs  filed claims 
against Pharmacia under the WPLA for design defect, construction defect, failure to 
warn at the time of sale, and failure to warn postsale .
1  They also sought punitive 
damages under Missouri law.    
By the time of trial in June 2021, Pharmacia was the sole remaining defendant 
in this case.  Since the filing of this lawsuit, over 250 SVEC teachers, students, and 
 
1 The lawsuit also includes Leahy’s husband, who claims loss of consortium.  The issues in this 
case do not depend on any distinction among the plaintiff -petitioners, and we refer to them 
collectively as Erickson or the plaintiffs.  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
7 family members have filed similar claims, resulting in 17 related  lawsuits filed over 
13 months.  This is the first SVEC case  against Pharmacia  to reach our court.  
The trial court ruled on 115 separate pretrial motions.  As relevant here, 
Erickson moved to establish that under Washington’s choice of law principles,  
Missouri law governs the issues of repose and punitive damages.  Pharmacia moved 
to dismiss the complaint, arguing that Washington law applied and that the WPLA’s  
statute of repose barred the plaintiffs’ claims.  T he trial court  applied Washington’s 
choice of law rules and concluded that Missouri has a stronger interest in enforcing 
its repose and punitive damages laws, which are designed to deter tortious conduct,  
than Washington has in applying its laws to limit plaintiffs’ recovery.  As a result, 
the court ruled in favor of Erickson and concluded that Missouri law governs  the 
issues of repose and punitive damages .   
Pharmacia  also moved under Frye and ER 702  to exclude testimony from 
industrial hygienist Kevin Coghlan, which Erickson proffered to show the teachers 
were likely exposed to injury-causing levels of PCBs during the time that they taught 
at SVEC.  In 2019, Coghlan prepared a report estimating the historic levels of PCBs 
in the air at SVEC during the time the teache rs worked there.  His report used three 
methods of estimation: one based on an EPA- published study measuring the rate at 
which various building materials absorb PCBs from the air, and two based on a 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
8 separate EPA -published study about pre - and postremediation levels of PCBs in 
similar public schools in New York City.    
Without holding an evidentiary hearing, the trial court initially granted 
Pharmacia’s motion in part and excluded Coghlan’s testimony aimed at estimating 
the air concentration of PCBs at SVEC.  Later, the trial court granted Erickson’s 
motion for reconside ration and admitted all the challenged evidence, still without 
holding an evidentiary hearing.  The court explained that its initial ruling was based 
on a misunderstanding of Coghlan’s methodology.   
Trial began in June 2021 and lasted approximately seven weeks.  Following 
two days of deliberations, the jury found for Erickson on all four WPLA claims.  The 
jury awarded compensatory damages of $15 million to Erickson, $17 million to 
Marquardt, $18 milli on to Leahy, and $150,000 to Leahy’s spouse for loss of 
consortium due to Leahy’s injuries.  Additionally, the jury awarded each teacher $45 
million in punitive damages .  The verdict form did not require the jury to specify 
which theory of liability suppor ted punitive damages, though the instructions 
required a finding of complete indifference to or conscious disregard for the safety 
of others,  consistent with Missouri law.  Pharmacia  challenged the verdict and  
moved for judgment as a matter of law, or, alternatively, for a new trial and for 
remittitur of the damage awards.  The trial court denied these motions.   

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
9 The Court of Appeals reversed in a split, published decision.  Erickson v. 
Pharmacia , LLC, 31 Wn. App. 2d 100, 1 10-11, 548 P.3d 226, review granted, 3 
Wn.3d 1018 (2024).  The court separately analyzed choice of law for the issues of 
repose and punitive damages.  For repose, the court disagreed with the trial court 
and held that Washington law applies.  Rather than adhere to  Washington’s usual 
choice of law methodology, which follows an issue -by-issue  approach, the court 
held that statutes of repose are “claim -defining ” and cannot be separated from the 
underlying law of liability.  Id. at 110.  The court further rejected Erickson’s 
constitutional challenge to the WPLA ’s statute of repose and remanded for  the trial 
court to consider  the claims under that presumptive 12 -year repose period.    
With respect to punitive damages, the Court of Appeals affirmed the trial 
court’s holding that Missouri law applies to authorize such damages.   However,  
notwithstanding its determination that Washington law supplies the substantive 
product liability standards,  the court limited the availability of punitive damages to 
claims recognized under Missouri product liability law, which it held does not 
include a postsale failure to warn claim.  Because  the verdict form did not require 
the jury to specify a liabilit y theor y for  punitive damages, the court remanded with 
the instruction to include a special interrogatory to that effect.    
Concerning the admissibility of Coghlan’s expert testimony, the Court of 
Appeals held that two of Coghlan’s three methods for estimating the teachers’ PCB 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
10 exposure should have been excluded under Frye  and declined to address them under 
ER 702.  The court held that Coghlan’s third method —a direct comparison with the 
New York s chools— did not implicate Frye  and satisfied the requirements of ER 
702.   
Writing separately, Judge Dwyer joined the majority’s holding that the 
WPLA’s  statute of repose is constitutional and reasoned that a contrary holding 
would likely invalidate the entire WPLA because the statute of repose is inseparable.  
Judge Dwyer dissented on the Frye  issue, concluding that Pharmacia’s challenges to 
Coghlan’s scientific method ology  concerned only  the weight of the testimony rather 
than admissibility.   
Erickson sought review on several issues : whether the WPLA’s  statute of 
repose applies , whether the statute  of repose  is constitutional , whether the punitive 
damages award is sustainable under Missouri law,  and whether Coghlan’s expert 
testimony satisfies  the Frye  standard and ER 702.  Pharmacia opposed review and 
raised a conditional issue in the event of review : whether Missouri law applies to the 
issue of punitive damages.  We granted review of all issues raised by both parties 
and accepted amic i briefs.2  We later asked  the parties to supplement the record with 
 
2 We accepted amici  briefs from (1) a group of six law professors (Symeon Symeonides et al.), (2) 
a single law professor (Kermit Roosevelt III), (3) a group of three law professors (Erin O’Hara 
O’Connor et al.), (4) a former Chief Justice of the Missouri Supreme Court and a law professor (Missouri law experts), (5) the Washington State Association for Justice Foundation, (6) former 
SVEC students and their families, (7) the Product Liability Advisory Council, and (8) the 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
11 relevant materials from a three -day Frye  hearing conducted in a subsequent SVEC 
case, Rose v. Pharmacia , No. 18 -2-58239 -3 SEA (King C ounty Super. Ct., Wash. 
Nov. 4, 2024)  (hereinafter Rose  Order) , which addressed the admissibility of 
Coghlan’s testimony based on methods essentially identical to those at issue here.   
ANALYSIS  
 We separate our analysis into two major sections.  We begin with choice of 
law, both the method of analysis and its application to the issues of repose and 
punitive damages. We then turn to the admissibility of Kevin Coghlan’s expert 
testimony  and whether his opinions  should have been excluded under Frye or ER 
702.   
I. Choice of Law  
The primary dispute  in this case centers on choice of law.  The parties agree 
that the WPLA  governs the substantive elements of liability: duty, breach, causation, 
and compensatory damages.  However, they disagree on whether the WPLA also 
governs the availability of repose and punitive damages in claims brought under the 
WPLA.  Erickson contends that under Washington’s choice of law principles , 
Missouri has the more significant interest in applying its laws on repose and punitive 
damages than Washington, and therefore Missouri law governs those discrete issues.  
 
Duwamish River Community Coalition, Puget Soundkeeper, the Waste Action Project and  BJ 
Cummings.  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
12 Pharmacia argues that the WPLA cannot be applied piecemeal, and that once the 
plaintiffs chose the WPLA as the law governing liability, its provisions must also 
govern repose and punitive damages.  We review choice of law questions de novo.  
Erwin v. Cotter Health Ctrs ., Inc., 161 Wn.2d 676, 691, 167 P.3d 1112 (2007) .  To 
provide context to the parties’ arguments, we find it helpful to briefly review the 
history of Washington’s  approach to  choice  of law.   
A. Washington applies the law of the  state with the most significant relationship 
to each particular issue in a case  
 
Choice of law rules are generally part of the common law,  and courts have the 
same freedom to adopt or change these rules as with other areas of the common law.  
RESTATEMENT (SECOND ) OF CONFLICT OF LAWS § 5 cmt s. a, c (Am. L. Inst. 1971).  
For many years, Washington  had resolved choice of law questions using the lex loci 
delicti rule —applying “the law of the place of wrong. ”  Johnson , 87 Wn.2d at 580; 
see also  Richardson v. Pac . Power & Light Co ., 11 Wn.2d 288, 299, 118 P.2d 985 
(1941) (“It is the universal rule that the existence and nature of a cause of action for tort are governed by the law of the place where the alleged wrong was committed.”) .  
Lex loci delicti, endorsed by Restatement of Conflicts of Laws (Am. L. Inst . 1934) , 
resolves choice of law disputes based solely on a single determinative fact : the place 
of conduct or injury.  R. Harvey Chappell Jr., Lex Loci Delicti and Babcock v. Jackson , 7
 WM. & MARY L. REV. 249 (1966) .   

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
13 In the 1950s, legal scholars,  dissatisfied with the rigidity and mechanical 
application of the first Restatement,  led a “ choice -of-law revolution ,” advocating for 
a more flexible , issue -specific a pproach that better served the “policies and interests 
of the respective states.”  Symeon C. Symeonides, The Choice -of-law Revolution 
Fifty Years After Currie: An End and a Beginning , 2015 U. ILL. L. REV. 1847, 1850, 
1917 (2015 ); Brainerd Currie, Comments on Babcock v. Jackson , a Recent 
Development in Conflict of Laws, 63 COLUM . L. REV. 1233, 1234 (1963) .  This 
nuanced approach, known as issue -by-issue analysis,  formed the foundation for 
Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws , published in 1971.  Symeon C. 
Symeonides, Issue -by-Issue Analysis and Dépeçage in Choice of Law: Cause and 
Effect , 45 U.  TOL. L. REV. 751 , 752 -53 (2014) (hereinafter Issue -by-Issue ).  
The Restatement (Second) requires  courts  to first follow  a legislature’s  
statutory directive on choice of law.  RESTATEMENT (SECOND ) § 6(1).  If no such 
directive exists , courts apply the “ law of the state which, with respect to that issue, 
has the most significant relationship to the occurrence and the parties under the 
principles stated in § 6.”  Id. at § 145(1).   The § 6 principles are not exhaustive, and 
courts are instructed to weigh the factors differently depending on the issue.  Id. § 6 
cmt. c.  These principles may include  
(a) the needs of the interstate and international systems,  
(b) the relevant policies of the forum,  
(c) the relevant policies of other interested states and the relative 
interests of those states in the determination of the particular issue ,  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
14 (d) the protection of justified expectations,  
(e) the basic policies underlying the particular field of law,  (f) certainty, predictability and uniformity of result, and  (g) ease in the determination and application of the law to be applied.   
 
Id. § 6(2).  In applying these principles to determine which state has the most 
significant relationship to an issue in tort, the  court consider s the following contacts :    
(a) the place where the injury occurred,  
(b) the place where the conduct causing the injury occurred,  
(c) the domicile, residence, nationality, place of incorporation and place 
of business of the parties, and  
(d) the place where the relationship, if any, between the parties is 
centered.   
 
Id.  § 145(2) .  “[C] ontacts are  to be  evaluated according to their relative importance 
with respect to the particular issue.”  Id.     
 Washington was an early adopter of Restatement (Second) .  See Baffin Land 
Corp. v. Monticello Motor Inn, Inc ., 70 Wn.2d 893, 898, 425 P.2d 623 (1967 ) 
(finding the draft of Restatement  (Second) to be more rational and “consistent with 
the standards of equity, fair play and justice”  in a contract choice of law issue).   In 
the 1976 tort case Johnson , we rejected the lex loci delict i rule in favor of applying 
Restatement  (Second) to determine whether Washington or Kansas law provided the 
applicable law on damages in a wrongful death claim .  87 Wn.2d at 580.  Johnson 
involved a Kansas resident who died in Kansas following a scaffolding collapse.  Id.  
at 578.  The scaffolding  had been designed and manufactured in Washington by 
Washington -based corporations.  Id . at 58 0-81.  The decedent’s estate filed a 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
15 wrongful death claim  in Washington against the manufacturers, alleging that the 
scaffolding was defectively designed and failed to withstand normal use.   Id. at 578.  
At issue was which state’s damages law should apply —Kansas law imposed a 
$50,000 cap on damages in wrongful death actions, while Washington law contained 
no limitation.  Id. at 578- 79.   
To determine the appropriate choice of law, we began by assessing each 
state’s contacts and identifying which were “most significant” to the cause of action.  
Id.  at 581.  On the one hand, the defendants were Washington corporations that 
designed, tested, manufactured, and advertised the scaffold in Washington.  Id.  The 
product was shipped from Washington to Kansas, and Washington law established the scaffold’s safety standards.  Id.  On the other hand, the plaintiff and decedent 
were Kansas residents, the injury occurred in Kansas, and the scaffold was not 
purchased directly from the corporations in Washington but ordered through a 
Kansas distributor for use in the Kansas- based business.  Id.  Recognizing that each 
state had a “distinct relationship” with the parties and the injury, the court concluded 
that the contacts were evenly balanced.  Id. at 582.  
We next examined  the interests and policies of e ach state , including the 
purpose sought to be achieved by each state’s laws.  Kansas’s wrongful death law, 
which limited recoverable damages , was primarily intended to protect Kansas 
residents from  excessive liability —not Washington residents.  Id. at 583.  By 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
16 contrast, Washington’s wrongful death law, which had no limit on damages , was 
designed  to “deter tortious conduct” and “encourage respondents to make safe 
products for its customers.”  Id.  We reasoned that the “‘sting of unlimited recover y 
. . . more effectively penalize[s]  the culpable defendant and deter [s] it and others 
similarly situated from such future conduct.’”  Id. (alterations in original ) (italics and 
internal quotation marks omitted)  (quoting Hurtado v. Superior C t., 11 Cal.  3d 574, 
583-84, 522 P.2d 666, 114 Cal.  Rptr. 106  (1974) .  We observed  that because all o f
the
 defendants were Washington corporations,  Washing ton’s interest was “clearly 
advanced by the application of its own law ,” whereas Kansas had “no interest” in 
limiting damages for Washington corporations being sued in their own home state.   
Id at 583 -84.  As a result, we held that Washington’s damages law applied.  Id. at 
584. 
Our analysis in Johnson provides a clear example of a court examining a 
discrete issue —damages for a wrongful death claim —and applying the law of the 
state with the most significant relationship to that issue.  We did not conduct a 
generalized  choice of law  analysis to determine whether Washington or Kansas law 
should govern every issue in the case.  Instead, we  focused  solely on the issue where  
the state’s laws conflicted , analyzed  the relevant state interests to that issue , and 
applied the law with the most significant relationship.  See RESTATEMENT (SECOND )
§145 cmt. d (“Each issue is to receive separate consideration if it is one which would

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
17 be resolved differently under the local law rule of two or more of the potentially 
interested states.”).   
Issue -by-issue analysis applies the same way to statutes as it does to common 
law causes of action.  See, e.g. , Rice v. Dow Chem. Co ., 124 W n.2d 205, 21 2, 875 
P.2d 1213 (1994) (applying a choice of law analysis to Washington’s statute of 
repose);  Zenaida -Garcia v. Recovery Sys . Technology, Inc. , 128 Wn. App. 256, 266, 
115 P.3d 1017 (2005) (same) ; Martin v. Humbert Constr., Inc ., 114 Wn. App. 823, 
829, 61 P.3d 1196 (2003) (same); see also Simon v. Philip Morris Inc ., 124 F. Supp. 
2d 46, 53 -54 (E.D.N.Y. 2000) (“Choice of law rules apply equally to claims brought 
under common law and statutory law.”).   Two Washington choice of law cases —
one addressing the WPLA’s  statute of repose and the other involving punitive 
damages —illustrate how the Johnson framework applies to distinct issues within the 
context of the WPLA.  Depending on the results of the analysis , a single state’s laws 
may govern all the issues or different states’  laws may a pply to different issues.  Both 
outcomes are permissible under Washington law.   
A good illustration of Washington’s issue -by-issue approach as applied to the 
WPLA’s repose is Rice, 124 Wn.2d 205.  There,  a forest service employee had been 
continuously exposed to herbicides while living and working in Oregon.  Id. at 207.  
Nearly two decades after moving to Washington, the employee developed leukemia  
and learned of a possible link to his past chemical exposure. Id.  Less than  three 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
18 years after his diagnosis, he sued the chemical manufacturer in Washington, alleging 
product liability claims for failure to warn and failure to provide adequate 
instructions.  Id.  The manufacturer moved to dismiss the claims under Oregon’ s 
eight -year statute of repose and two -year statute of limitations.  Id.  The trial court 
granted the motion, concluding that Oregon had the most significant relationship to the cause of action and, under Oregon law, the claims were either time -barred or 
extinguished.  Id. at 208.  
On appeal, we observed that although Washington and Oregon have different 
limitation periods, these variations “ are not subject to conflict of laws methodology.”  
Id. at 210.  Instead, we explained that under Washington’s borrowing statute , RCW 
4.18.020, “limitation periods are ‘to be governed by the limitations law of a state 
whose law governs other substantive issues inherent in the claim.’” Id.  at 211 
(quoting U
NIF. CONFLICT OF L.-LIMITATIONS ACT § 2 cmt., 12 U.L.A. 63 (Supp. 
1994)).  The statute has a narrow application, however.  We clarified that unlike 
statutes of limitations, statutes of repose are not subject to the borrowing statute and 
may raise a conflict of substantive law.  Id.  at 212.   
We then turned to determining whether Washington or Oregon law on repose 
should apply.   We began by evaluating whether a conflict existed, noting that the 
parties had not specified whether the claims were brought under the WPLA or under 
Washington common law.  Despite this uncertainty , we concluded that a conflict 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
19 existed.   Id.  If the WPLA applied, its statute of repose would bar claims after the 
product’s useful safe life expired, presumptively at 12 years.  Id.  If the WPLA did 
not apply, Washington  law imposed no period for repose.  Id.  In contrast, Oregon’s 
statute of repose imposed an absolute bar on liability after 8 years.  Id.  We concluded 
that whether governed by the WPLA or Washington common law, Washington and 
Oregon law conflicted on the issue of repose.   Id. at 213.  
After identifying the conflict, we  next examined each state’s contacts and 
corresponding state interests as they relate d to repose.  The plaintiff was domiciled 
in Washington, their injury was discovered there, and Washington had a “real 
interest” in ensuring that its residents were compensated for injuries.  Id. at 216.  
However, we noted that residency alone is not a sufficient basis to apply forum law.   
Id.  By contrast, we found that Oregon had a strong interest in providing repose for 
manufacturers doi ng business in Oregon and whose products were used there.  Id.  
Oregon also had an interest in regulating “allegedly dangerous or mislabeled 
products” shipped to and used within its borders —an interest that we highlighted is 
not extinguished simply because the  exposed individual “later moves to another 
state.”3  Id.  Weighing these interests, we held that Oregon had the most significant 
 
3  The parties did not argue that either Washington or Oregon was the place of the defendant ’s 
main headquarters, state of incorporation, place where the product was designed or tested, place 
where appropriate warnings for the label were determined, or place where the product was labeled.  Rice, 124 Wn.2d at 214.  Neither did the part ies contend that the law of  Michigan , where  Dow’s 
headquarters  are located, should apply.    

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
20 relationship to repose and , therefore, Oregon’s statute of repose applied to bar the 
plaintiff’s claims.  Id.  We also applied Oregon’s statute of limitations, stating in a 
single sentence, “[T]he application of Oregon law to the substantive claim requires 
the application of the Oregon limitation period as well.”  Id.  at 217.   
Pharmacia interprets Rice to suggest that statutes of repose are inseparable 
from the substantive law underlying the claim.  However, Rice did not establish that 
the state’s law governing liability automatically dictates the application of that state’s statute of repose.  Notably , the parties in Rice did not dispute which state’s 
law governed the substantive basis for liability, and we did not evaluate each state’s 
competing interests in applying its liability law.   Instead, we focused on each state’s 
interests and policies specifically as they pertained to repose.  It is this method of analysis, not the particular outcome, that is most significant.   See also, e. g., Gantes 
v. Kason  Corp. , 145 N.J. 478, 679 A.2d 106, 109 (1996) (finding that 
characterization of Georgia’s statute of repose as substantive  did not preclude issue -
by-issue analysis and concluding the law of the place of the tortious conduct 
governed repose) .  When addressing conflicts of law involving the WPLA ’s statute 
of repose, we treat repose as a distinct issue and apply a separate choice of law 
analysis.  
By its nature,  issue -by-issue analysis may result in two states’ laws applying 
to govern different issues in the same cause of action.  S cholars sometimes refer to 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
21 this result as “dépeçage,” French for dismemberment.  Issue -by-Issue , supra , at 
755, n.26.  However, we note that “dépeçage ” has also been used to  broadly refer 
to the analytical method of issue -by-issue analysis.  See  BLACK ’S LAW DICTIONARY  
551 (12 th ed. 2024) (defining “dépeçage ” as “[a] court ’s application of different 
state laws to different issues in a legal dispute; choice of law on an issue -by-issue 
basis”); Issue -by-Issue , supra , at 757 ( identifying  that courts have referred to 
“dépeçage as a ‘mystical doctrine, ’ a plain ‘doctrine, ’ a ‘legal theory, ’ an 
‘approach, ’ a ‘principle, ’ a ‘rule, ’ a ‘technique, ’ or a ‘ process’ ” (footnotes omitted) 
(quoting Marakova v. United States, 201 F.3d 110, 114 (2d Cir. 2000); Burlington  
N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co. v. ABC -NACO , 389 Ill. App. 3d 691, 906 N.E.2d 83, 93 
(2009); Act I, LLC v. Davis , 2002 WY 183, 60 P.3d 145, 149; Buchanan v. John  
Doe, 246 Va. 67, 431 S.E.2d 289, 291 (1993); Savage Arms, Inc. v. W. Auto Supply  
Co., 18 P.3d 49, 53 (Alaska 2001); Trivelloni -Lorenzi v. Pan Am. World Airways, 
Inc., 821 F.2d 1147, 1174 (5th Cir. 1987) (Gee, J., concurring in part and 
dissenting in part); Townsend v. Sears, Roebuck & Co. , 227 Ill. 2d 147, 879 N.E.2d 
893, 901, 316 Ill. Dec. 505 (2007)) ). The Court of Appeals approach in this case 
appears to  use the term in this broader sense , as the court began by asking 
“whether dépeçage is appropriate here,” or, in other words, “whether it is 
appropriate to treat the statute of repose separately from the portions of WPLA 
imposing liability.”  Erickson , 31 Wn. App. 2d at 118.  Our analysis will benefit 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
22 from understanding and employing the more precise definition of “dépeçage ”—not  
as synonymous with “issue -by-issue analysis” but rather as reflect ing “the potential 
and occasional result  of issue -by-issue analysis.”  Issue -by-Issue , supra, at 757.  
To be clear, Washington courts should always engage in issue -by-issue analysis 
when resolving a dispute about choice of law, and dépeçage is a potential result of 
that analysis.    
A common concern regarding dépeçage is whether applying different states’ 
laws to separate issues within a single cause of action interferes with the purpose of 
a state law or policy decision.  Id . at 759 (Dépeçage  must be avoided when two rules 
of the same state are “so closely interrelated . . . that applying the one rule without the other would drastically upset the equilibrium established by the two rules and 
would distort and defeat the policies of that state.” );  Johnson v. Cont ’l Airlines 
Corp ., 964 F.2d 1059, 1064 (10th Cir. 1992) (holding dépeçage is inappropriate 
“when used to fragment issues related to a common purpose or to legitimatize a 
smorgasbord approach which inures only to the benefit of the party picking and 
choosing”).  However, if applying a particular state’s laws would not meaningfully 
advance that state’s policies, courts have broad discretion to prevent such outcomes by properly weighing each state’s interests and applying the law whose interests and 
policies are best served.  Issue -by-Issue , supra , at 759- 60. 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
23 Prior to this case, only three Washington opinions have used the term 
dépeçage, all from  the Court of Appeals.4  See FutureSelect Portfolio Mgmt., Inc. v. 
Tremont Grp. Holdings, Inc., 175 Wn. App. 840, 85 6 n.15, 309 P.3d 555 (2013) 
(“Under the principle of dépeçage, different issues in a single case arising out of a 
common nucleus of facts may be decided according to the substantive law of 
different states.”); Pope Res. , LP v. Certain Underwriters at Lloyd ’s of London , 19 
Wn. App. 2d 113, 123 n.21, 494 P.3d 1076 (2021) (quoting FutureSelect , 175 Wn.2d 
at 857 n.15); Hai v. STL Int ’l, Inc ., No. 43877 -1-II, slip op. at 4 n.1 (Wash. Ct. App. 
Apr. 15, 2014) (unpublished)  (clarifying that “t he principle of dépeçage allows for 
the application of different substantive state law only to different legal claims, not 
different defendants on the same claim”) , 
https://www.courts.wa.gov/opinions/pdf/D2%2043877 -1-
II%20%20Unpublished%20Opinion.pdf .  Notably, while the term dépeçage was not 
expressly mentioned, at least one published Washington choice of law case, Singh 
 
4 Federal courts applying Washington’ s choice of law  rules have used the term more frequently, 
referring to it both in the broader sense described above as well as a specific result.  Compare 
Experience Hendrix, LLC v. HendrixLicensing.com, LTD , 766 F. Supp. 2d 1122, 1136 (W.D. 
Wash. 2011) (“Although some states do not follow the rule of dépeçage, Washington does.”); Karpenski v. Am. Gen. Life Cos. , 999 F. Supp. 2d 1235, 1239 (W.D. Wash. 2014) (“Washington 
follows the rule of d[ é]pe[ç]age.”) , with Nazar v. Harbor Freight Tools USA Inc ., No. 2:18- CV-
00348- SMJ, 2019 WL 2066127, at *1 (E.D. Wash. Mar. 8, 2019)  (court order)  (recognizing that 
under the principle of dépeçage, the “court may apply the laws of one state to a plaintiff's request for compensatory damages and apply the laws of another for punitive damages”); Milgard Mfg., 
Inc. v. Il l. Union Ins. Co ., No. C10- 5943 RJB, 2011 WL 3298912, at *3 (W.D. Wash. Aug. 1, 
2011) (court order) (“Washington follows the rule of dépeçage, which may require the Court to 
apply the law of one forum to one issue, while applying the law of a different forum to another issue in the same case.”).  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
24 v. Edward s Lifesciences Corp ., 151 Wn. App. 137, 210 P.3d 337 (2009), applied 
Washington law to liability while applying another state’s law to govern punitive 
damages.  
In Singh , a Washington resident was injured in a Washington hospital as a 
result of a defective heart monitor used during surgery.  Id. at 140.   The patient filed 
product liability claims under  the WPLA against the California -based manufacturer, 
alleging design defect, construction defect, failure to warn, and postsale failure to 
warn , and also brought common law claims for violation of the Consumer Protection 
Act, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and fraudulent misrepresentation.  
Second Am. C ompl. for Damages & Pleading Foreign Law at 4 -5, Singh v. Edwards 
Lifesciences Corp. , No. 05 -2-12213 -5 (King County Sup er. Ct., May 24, 2007).  The 
patient sought punitive damages for all claims under California law.  Id .  
To determine whether Washington or California law governed the availability 
of punitive damages, the court examined each state’s contacts, policies, and interests 
specific to that issue.  While the injury occurred in Washington, the court 
emphasized that the conduct causing the injury occurred in California.  Singh , 151 
Wn. App. at 146 -47.  Specifically, the manufacturer was headquartered in California, 
the defect in the monitor’s software was discovered there, and the decision not to 
recall or warn consumers was also made in California.  Id .  The court found that 
when a company headquartered in California engages in tortious conduct within the 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
25 state that leads to the plaintiff’s damages, “California ha[s] the greater interest in 
deterring such fraudulent activities.”  Id. at 140.  In contrast, the court found that 
“[e]ven though Washington has a strong policy against punitive damages, it has no interest in protecting companies that commit fraud.”  Id.  Considering these interests, 
the court concluded that while the WPLA applied to govern liability and 
compensatory damages, California had a more significant relationship to the issue 
of punitive da mages.  As a result, California law governed  only that specific issue.  
Id. at 148 ; see also Barr v. Interbay Citizens Bank , 96 Wn.2d 692, 635 P.2d 441 
(1981) (applying a choice -of-law analysis specific to the issue of punitive damages). 
Pharmacia argues that Singh  is distinguishable because its claims included not 
only WPLA claims but also common law claims, and the opinion did not address 
whether dépeçage was appropriate.  It contends that Restatement (Second)  § 171 
mandates that the “‘law selected by application of the rule of § 145,’ which governs choice of law for liability, ‘determines the measure of damages,’ including ‘the right to exemplary damages.’”  Suppl. Br. of Resp’t /Cross-Pet’r Pharmacia LLC (Suppl. 
Br. of Resp’t) at 21 (quoting R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND ) § 171 cmt. d.).  This argument 
is based on a flawed premise.  It assumes § 145 determines only the law of liability.  In fact, § 145 provides a general framework “applicable to all torts and to all issues 
in tort.”  R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND ) § 145 cmt. a .  The reporter’s note to § 171 clarifies, 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
26 “The law governing the right to exemplary damages need not necessarily be the same 
as the law governing the measure of compensatory damages.”  
In addition, a lthough not expressly stated, the Singh court did consider 
whether dépeçage was appropriate in its analysis.  That inquiry is embedded within 
issue -by-issue analysis as part of the most significant relationship test.  The court 
evaluated whether applying each state’s law would further the underlying purpose and polic ies of those laws.  Washington law favors full compensation for injured 
plaintiffs but rejects punitive damages as an improper “windfall.”  Dailey v. N.  Coast 
Life Ins. Co. , 129 Wn.2d 572, 574, 919 P.2d 589  (1996) ; see Spokane Truck & Dray 
Co. v. Hoefer, 2 Wash. 45, 53, 25 P. 1072 (1891)  (disapproving of punitive damages 
on the ground that compensatory damages make the  plaintiffs “entirely whole” and 
“[s]urely the public can have no interest in exacting the pound of flesh”).  In contrast, 
California law permits punitive damages to “deter[] its corporations from engaging in such fraudulent conduct.”  Singh , 151 Wn. App. at 148.   
Applying Washington law to determine liability and compensatory damages 
while applying California law to punitive damages respects  the policy interests of 
both states.  As the  Singh court observed, Washington has “ no interest in protecting 
companies that commit  fraud .”  Id. at 140; see also Kammerer  v. W. Guar. Corp. , 
96 Wn.2d 416,  422, 635 P.2d 708 (1981) .  By considering the policy and purpose 
behind each state’s laws, the court applied the most significant relationship test in a 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
27 manner that advances, and does not distort, each state’s interests with respect to the 
particular issue .  
Washington’s cases on choice of law reflect a commitment to providing a 
“nuanced, individualized, and . . . rational,  resolution” to conflicts of law problems.  
Issue -by-Issue , supra, at 754.  We affirm the choice of law principles established 
over five decades ago in Johnson .  Absent a statutory directive, w hen the laws of 
interested states conflict— whether concerning punitive damages  or repose , or 
whether the law is defined by common law or by statute —courts must  conduct a 
separate choice of law analysis for each issue.  The potential result of such analysis 
is that in some instances, one state’s law may govern liability while another state’s 
law may govern a different  issue within the same cause of action.   This issue -by-
issue approach  has guided Washington’s choice of law analysis for the last  50 years.  
With th is background in mind, we  turn to resolving the choice of law disputes 
in this case .  We first address Pharmacia’s argument that the legislature intended for 
the WPLA to require that Washington law governs the issues of repose and punitive 
damages for every claim brought under the WPLA . 
B. The WPLA does not  override Washington choice of law rules and require 
the application of  Washington law to every issue arising in a claim  under the 
WPLA 
 
When  engaging in a choice of law analysis, courts must  first determine if there 
is an actual conflict of law.  Erwin , 161 Wn.2d at 692.  An actual conflict exists 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
28 where the result of an issue is different under the laws of two or more interested 
states.  Woodward v. Taylor, 184 Wn.2d 911, 918, 366 P.3d 432 (2016).  If there is 
no conflict, the local law of the forum applies.  Id.  We have previously recognized 
that both s tatutes of repose and punitive damages are issues that may create a conflict 
of substantive law.  See Rice, 124 W n.2d at 212 (repose); Kammerer , 96 Wn .2d at 
421 (punitive damages) .   
Here, an actual conflict exists between Washington and Missouri law 
regarding the availability of repose and punitive damages in product liability claims.  
The WPLA includes a statute of repose, codified at RCW 7.72.060, that limits the 
liability of produc t sellers by establishing a presumptive 12-year useful safe life for 
products.  It states,  
(1) Useful safe life. . . . [A] product seller shall not be subject to liability 
to a claimant for harm under this chapter if the product seller proves by 
a preponderance of the evidence that the harm was caused after the produ ct’s “useful safe life ” had expired.  
“Useful safe life ” begins at the time of delivery of the product 
and extends for the time during which the product would normally be likely to perform or be stored in a safe manner.  . . . 
 . . . . 
(2) Presumption regarding useful safe life. If the harm was 
caused more than twelve years after the time of delivery, a presumption arises that the harm was caused after the useful safe life had expired. This presumption may only be rebutted by a preponder ance of the 
evidence.  
 
RCW 7.72.060.  In contrast, Missouri law does not contain a statute of repose for 
product liability claims. See Lay v. P&G Health Care, Inc ., 37 S.W.3d 310, 321 -22 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
29 (Mo.  Ct. App. 2000) (rejecting application of statute of repose in a case involving 
improvements to real property with respect to activities associated with selling a 
defective product).    
Washington and Missouri law also conflict concerning the availability of 
punitive damages.  Under Washington law, punitive damages are not recoverable unless expressly authorized by statute, and the WPLA provides no such 
authorization.  Kammerer , 96 Wn.2d at 421.  In contrast, Missouri law allows 
punitive damages in tort cases whenever the plaintiff proves that the defendant show ed “‘complete indifference to or conscious disregard for the safety of othe rs.’” 
Poage v . Crane Co ., 523 S.W.3d 496, 515 (Mo. Ct. App. 2017) (discussing standards 
for allowing punitive damages in a products liability case  (quoting Jone v. Coleman 
Corp. , 183 S.W.3d 600, 610 (Mo. Ct. App. 200 5)); M
ISSOURI  APPROVED JURY 
INSTR UCTIONS : CIVIL 10.02 (8th ed.  2022 ).  Because the result would be different 
depending on whether Washington or Missouri law applied, there is a conflict requiring a choice of law analysis.    
Once a conflict of law is identified, Restatement (Second)  requires courts to  
follow a statutory directive  on choice of law, if one exists.   R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND ) 
§ 6.  Such directives need not be explicitly stated.  Id. § 6 cmt.  b.  Instead, courts are 
tasked with giving a statute “the range of application intended by the legislature when these intentions can be ascertained and can constitutionally be given effect.”  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
30 Id.  “If the legislature intended that the statute  should be applied to the out- of-state 
facts involved,  the court should so apply it”  without conducting further  choice of 
law analysis.   Id.  However, t he “normal presumption” is that a “statute leaves the 
state’s ordinary choice -of-law principles untouched.”  Caleb Nelson, State and 
Federal Models of the Interaction between Statutes and Unwritten Law , 80 U. CHI. 
L. REV. 657, 667, 668 (2013); see  RESTATEMENT (SECOND ) § 6 cmt . c (“Legislatures 
usually legislate . . . only with the local situation in mind.”) .  In the absence of a 
legislative directive,  Restatement (Second)  instructs  courts to apply the law of the 
state with the most significant relationship  to the specific conflicting issue .  
RESTATEMENT (SECOND ) § 145.      
Here, we find no evidence  in the WPLA  that the legislature intended to 
provide courts with a directive  on choice of law for either repose or punitive 
damages.  The WPLA ’s statute of repose states, “[A] product seller shall not be 
subject to liability to a claimant for harm under this chapter if the product seller 
proves by a preponderance of the evidence the harm was caused after the product's 
‘useful safe life’ had expire d.”  RCW 7.72.060(1).  The act defines “ product seller ” 
as “any person or entity that is engaged in the business of selling products.”  RCW 
7.72.010(1).  P harmacia argues that the phrase “‘a product seller shall not be subject 
to liability to a claimant for harm under this chapter’ ” means that the statute of 
repose applies to every product seller and to every claim brought under the WPLA.  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
31 Appellant  Pharmacia LLC’s Reply Br. at 12, 19 ( Wash. Ct. App. No. 83287- 5-I 
(2022)) (quoting RCW 7.72.060(1)(a)).   The Court of Appeals agreed, concluding 
that the legislature intended to make “the statute of repose mandatory to the existence 
of a WPLA claim.”  Erickson , 31 Wn. App. 2d at 123.  We disagree.  
The WPLA was enacted five years after this court adopted Restatement 
(Second)  in Johnson , and that case reflects  Washington common law on choice  of 
law.  Common law is not to be lightly discarded— it is as much “ a part of the law as 
any other branch of the state ’s law.”  RESTATEMENT (SECOND ) § 5 cmt. a.  A statute 
will not be read “[t]o abrogate the common law” without “‘ clear evidence of the 
legislature’s intent. ’”  Dearinger v. Eli Lilly & Co. , 199 Wn.2d 569, 575, 510 P.3d 
326 (2022)  (quoting Potter v. Wash. State Patrol, 165 Wn.2d 67, 77, 196 P.3d 691 
(2008)) ; ANTONIN SCALIA & BRYAN A. GARNER , READING LAW: THE 
INTERPRETATION OF LEGAL TEXTS  318 (2012 ) (“Statutes will not be interpreted as 
changing the common law unless they effect the change with clarity.”).   Such 
evidence is absent here.   
While the WPLA provides the substantive provisions to determine product 
liability under Washington law, it does not purport to modify Washington’s choice 
of law rules.  T he WPLA applies broadly to all product sellers, and nothing in its 
text, legislative history, or subsequent interpretations suggests that the legislature intended the WPLA to entirely displace the common law.  See  S
ENATE SELECT 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
32 COMM ITTEE  ON TORT & PRODUCT  LIABILITY  REFORM FINAL REPORT  (Jan. 1981)  
(hereinafter FINAL REPORT ).  Instead, the WPLA expressly preserves the common 
law, including Johnson , by stating that the “applicable law . . . is modified only to 
the extent set forth in this chapter.” RCW 7.72.020(1).  We presume legislation to 
be consistent with prior judicial decisions.  In re Marriage of Williams , 115 Wn.2d 
202, 208, 796 P.2d 421 (1990).  
The dissent makes the same assumption as the Court of Appeals and 
Pharmacia that the WPLA’s inclusion of a statute of repose reflects a choice of law 
determination. Dissent at 7 (concluding that “the WPLA’s statute of repose inheres 
in all WPLA claims” (emphasis added) ).  This argument would have us misconstrue 
the WPLA’s statute of repose as an explicit legislative directive on choice of law, 
when in fact express choice of law provisions are different and rare.  See  
RESTATEMENT (SECOND ) § 6 cmt. a (“Statutes that are expressly directed to choice 
of law, that is to say, statutes which provide for the application of the local law of one state, rather than the local law of another state, are comparatively few in 
number.”).    
To be clear, w hile the WPLA contains an explicit statute of repose, it does not 
contain the type of language that would provide conclusive evidence of a legislative directive on when to apply one state’s law over another.  We do not find the “wealth 
of evidence” that th e dissent insists exists that points to a legislative intent to provide 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
33 a directive on choice of law.  Dissent at 5.   Indeed, there is nothing in the language 
of the WPLA that directs us to ignore Washington’s long -standing issue -by-issue 
approach to choice of law and instead apply the WPLA  repose provision regardless 
of our choice of law rules.   
The legislature has shown that it knows how to modify choice of law rules 
when it wishes to do so.  Just two years after the legislature enacted the WPLA, the 
legislature enacted the Uniform Conflict of Laws –Limitations Act, known as the 
“borrowing” statute, which expressly removes statutes of limitations from  Johnson ’s 
most sig nificant relationship test .  See LAWS OF 1983, ch. 15 2 (codified at RCW 
4.18.020).  The act mandates that the law governing  the substantive claim also 
determines the applicable statute of limitations, eliminating the need for a  separate 
choice of law analysis .  The legislature has enacted no such provision with respect 
to statutes of repose, which are well understood as distinct from statutes of limitation.  Rice , 124 Wn.2d at 2 11-12 ( concluding that “statutes of repose are to be 
treated not as statutes of limitation, but as part of the body of a state's substantive 
law in making choice -of-law determinations”).  
The WPLA likewise does not require the application of Washington law to 
limit punitive damages in every claim brought under the WPLA.   It states that 
manufacturers may be subject to liability for “har m . . . proximately caused by” 
violations of the statute.  RCW 7.72.030(1) -(2).  The legislature defined “harm” as 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
34 “any damages recognized by the courts of this state .”  RCW 7.72.010(6) (emphasis 
added).  Pharmacia argues that because Washington does not “recognize” punitive 
damages, the WPLA precludes the application of punitive damages under another 
state’s law.  Suppl. Br. of Resp’t at 17.  However, there is a critical distinction 
between damages being “available ” under Washington law and damages being 
“recognized ” by the courts of Washington.   “Recognize ” is defined  as “to 
acknowledge” or “admit the  . . . validity o f.”  W EBSTER ’S THIRD NEW 
INTERNATIONAL  DICTIONARY  1896 (2002).  Under choice of law principles, 
Washington courts have acknowledged and awarded damages under the laws of 
other states, even when such damages would not be available under Washington law.  See Kammerer, 96 Wn.2d 416 (awarding punitive damages under California law); 
Singh , 151 Wn. App. 137 (same); 6 W
ASHINGTON PRACTICE : WASH INGTON PATTERN 
JURY INSTR UCTIONS : CIVIL  110.00 (6th ed.  2012 ) (“Washington courts will apply the 
punitive damages law of other jurisdictions in product liability cases, if warranted under choice of law principles. In such a situation, the jury instructions on punitive 
damages should conform to the laws of the other state.”).   
The scope of harm recognized under the WPLA was intended  to be expansive.  
Although  most of the WPLA’s definition al provisions  are based on the Model 
Uniform Product Liability Act (UPLA), 44 Fed. Reg. 62,714  (Oct. 31, 1979), the 
Senate special committee tasked with drafting the WPLA  explained that it  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
35 intentionally chose not to adopt the UPLA’s more restrictive definition of “harm,” 
which limited remedies to statutorily designated categories.5  FINAL REPORT , supra ,
at 32.  Instead, the  c ommittee adopted a “broad definition,”  “allowing  for the 
continued development of the concept through case law.”  Id.   
The committee also chose not to adopt the UPLA’s provision on punitive 
damages,6 a decision that Pharmacia argues clearly demonstrates the legislature’s 
intent to prohibit punitive damages for any claims brought under the WPLA. However, this deviation  from the UPLA simply reflects Washington’s policy 
decision to not allow punitive damages as a matter of its own substantive law.  There 
is no indication that the legislature intended to prohibit punitive  damages when 
authorized under the law of another state.  The WPLA  provides for  “damages 
recognized by the courts of this state ,” and Washington courts have repeatedly 
recognized and awarded punitive damages under another state’s law when consistent with Washington’s choice of law pri nciples. RCW 7.72.010(6).   
5 As defined in the UPLA, “Harm . . . includes physical harm to persons and property.  This Act 
provides that harm may manifest itself as damage to property, disability, including personal 
physical injuries and illness, death, and mental anguish or emotional harm attendant to such disability or death. It also includes mental anguish or emotional harm in circumstances in which the claimant is actually placed in personal danger, and the mental anguish or emotional harm is accompanied by substantial objective symptomatology.”  44 Fed. Reg. § 102( F) at 62 ,719 (italics 
omitted) .   
6 The UPLA  provides, “Punitive damages may be awarded to the claimant if the claimant proves 
by clear and convincing evidence that the harm  suffered was the result of the product seller ’s 
reckless disregard for the safety of product users, consumers, or others who might be harmed by the product.”  Id.  § 120(A) at 62,748.  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
36 For the reasons stated above, we conclude the WPLA contains no statutory 
directive requiring the exclusive application of Washington law to repose and 
punitive damages.   We now apply Johnson ’s most significant relationship test to the 
facts of this case.   
C. Under the most significant relationship test, Missouri has a stronger interest 
than Washington in having its law applied to determine the availability of 
repose and punitive damages  
 
Courts  have somewhat artificially described the most significant relationship 
test as a two -step inquir y—first,  evaluating relevant contacts and  then,  if evenly 
balanced, assessing each state’s policies and interests.  However, the analysis 
ultimately requires  consideration of all the factors.  Courts must evaluate each state’s 
contacts  in light of the principles set out in  Restatement (Second)  § 6 and also must 
examine each state’s interests and policies as related to the particular issue .  This 
requires analyzing the “‘ purpose sought to be achieved’” by each state’s relevant 
laws.  Johnson , 87 Wn.2d at 582 (italics omitted) (quoting R ESTATEMENT (SECOND ) 
§ 175 cmt. d) .  For personal injury actions, courts presume that the law of the state 
where the injury occurred applies unless another state has a more significant 
relationship .  RESTATEMENT (SECOND ) § 146.    
We recogniz e that both Washington and Missouri  have a distinct relationship 
to the parties and the cause of action in this case .  The plaintiffs are Washington 
residents who filed product liability claims in Washington for injuries sustained in 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
37 Washington.  Pharmacia had contacts with Washington —it maintained  offices in 
Washington, sold the product in Washington, and the product was installed in a 
Washington public school.  On the other hand, the allegedly  tortious conduct— the 
defective design, manufacturing , and failure to warn— primarily occurred at 
Pharmacia ’s headquarters in Missouri, where decisions regarding marketing, 
medical testing, labeling, and health and safety standards were made.  Further, 
Erickson had no direct interaction with Pharmacia , as the injuries arose from a  
defective product that had been  purchased and installed by a third party long before 
Erickson’s exposure at the school.   
With the se relevant  contacts in mind, we now consider each state’s interests 
concerning the two disputed issues: repose and punitive damages.    
1. Missouri has a stronger interest in applying its law on repose  
 
We begin by evaluating the policies and interests behind each state’s laws on 
repose .  The WPLA was enacted in response to a perceived “product liability crisis” 
in the early 1970s, when rising product liability insurance premiums prompted calls 
for federal and state legislative reform.  F INAL REPORT , supra,  at 13 .  At the federal 
level, the U.S. Department of Commerce  formed a task force to research the issue, 
leading to publication of the UPLA in 1979, intended for voluntary adoption by the 
states.  See 44 Fed. Reg. 62, 714.  At the same time , Washington policymakers 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
38 pursued state specific product liability reforms.  After multiple failed attempts to 
pass legislation, the s enate created a special committee to conduct a thorough review 
of the need for product liability reform in Washington.  F INAL REPORT , supra,  at 2-
3.  Over an 18-month period,  the committee reviewed the federal task force report, 
analyzed other states’ legislative efforts, consulted experts and stakeholders, held 
public hearings, and surveyed insurance companies operating within Washington .  
Id. at 16 -19.  The committee  focused on identifying the root causes of the sharp rise  
in insurance prices and, specifically , whether it  resulted from insurance underwriting 
practices  or the existing  state of  tort law.   1 SENATE JOURNAL , 47th Leg., Reg. Sess., 
at 619 (Wash. 1981) .   
In January 1981, the committee published a final report containing its 
findings , explanations for how the research informed  its recommendations,  and a 
draft product liability bill , S.B. 3158,  heavily modeled after the UPLA.  The 
committee a cknowledged  “the national character of product manufacturing and 
marketing” and stated that the bill was intended to contribute to a “measure of 
uniformity” in product liability law.  FINAL REPORT , supra,  at 15, 16.  The WPLA ’s 
preamble reflects  the legislature’s intent to balance two key interests: (1) preserving  
“the right of the consumer to recover for injuries sustained as a result of an unsafe 
product,” and (2) protect ing “retail businesses located primarily in the state of 
Washington . . . from the substantially increasing product liability insurance costs 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
39 and unwarranted exposure to product liability litigation.”  LAWS OF  1981, ch.  27, § 
1.  The pursuit of these two primary interests is reflected in the WPLA’s statute of 
repos e, which aims “to bring some certainty” for  product seller s and manufacturers  
by limiting  the period  in which they may be held liable for harm caused by a 
defective product.  FINAL REPORT , supra,  at 19.   At the same time, the legislature 
sought to balance  this business interest  with the consumer interest in “preserving” 
the right to receive  compensation for harm caused by defective products.  Id.  Rather 
than imposing  a fixed cutoff date for immunity , which would have provided absolute  
certainty for product insurer s, the legislature adopted a more consumer -friendly 
repose provision that incorporated the UPLA’s flexible concept of a “useful safe 
life.”  Id. at 42.  A product’s “useful safe life” begins at delivery and “extends for 
the time during which the product would normally be likely to perform or be stored 
in a safe manner.”  RCW 7.72.060(1).   
To further mitigate the burden of a repose provision on consumers, the 
legislature diverged from the UPLA in two notable ways.  First, it extended the 
presumptive useful safe life from  10 years to 12 years, and second , it lower ed the 
burden of proof for consumers challenging the presumption after 12 years  from clear 
and convincing evidence to a preponderance of the evidence.  Compare RCW  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
40  7.72.060(2) , with UPLA § 110.7  These modifications reflect the WPLA’s broader 
goal to “creat e a fairer and more equitable distribution of liability among parties at 
fault.”  LAWS OF  1981, ch.  27, § 1. 
Erickson argues that Washington has no compelling interest in applying its 
statute of repose to shield an out-of -state corporation from liability, particularly 
when doing so may prevent Washington citizens from receiving full compensation.   
This argument goes too far, however.   Washington certainly has a legitimate interest 
in enforcing its laws consistent with the policy objectives underlying the WPLA.  
The WPL A’s statute of repose promote s nationwide uniformity in product liability 
standards and helps to curb rising product liability insurance costs— objectives 
potentially furthered by applying the WPLA’s statute of repose in every circumstance.   In addition, the statute’s expansive definition of “product seller ” and 
“manufacturer ” reflect Washington’s interest in protecting all those  doing business 
within the state from extended liability.  See  RCW 7.72.010(1), (2).   
 
7 Sec. 110. Length of Time Product Sellers are Subject to Liability   
(A) Useful Safe Life .  
(1) Except as provided in Subsection (A)(2), a product seller shall not be subject to liability 
to a claimant for harm under this Act if the product seller proves by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the harm was caused after the product ’s “useful safe life ” had expired. . . .  
. . . . (B) Statute of Repose . 
(1) Generally. In claims that involve harm caused more than ten (10) years after time of 
delivery, a presumption arises that the harm was caused after the useful safe life had expired. This presumption may only be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence.  
Id. at 62,732.  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
41 But that is not all that we must consider.  The question is not merely whether 
Washington has an interest in applying its statute of repose but rather whether that 
interest outweighs Missouri’s interest in applying its own laws.   The twin purposes 
of the WPLA are to preserve the right of consumers to recover for injuries and to 
protect retail businesses primarily located within Washington.  L AWS OF  1981, ch.  
27, § 1.  Applying the WPLA statute of repose to potentially limit a Washington 
citizen’s ability to recover against an out- of-state corporation does not serve either 
of those purposes.8    
This case is similar to Zenaida -Garcia , where the Court of Appeals concluded  
that Oregon’s interest in limiting the liability of an out- of-state corporation through 
the application of its statute of repose was outweighed by Washington’s competing 
 
8 Pharmacia contends that applying Missouri law to the issue of repose or punitive damages for an 
out-of-state corporation —while hypothetically applying Washington law to an in-state corporation 
for the same tortious conduct —would result in violation of the dormant c ommerce clause. 
However, Pharmacia does not raise a constitutional challenge.  Instead, it appears to argue that the 
principles of constitutional avoidance compel such a result.  Pharmacia cites no authority supporting the claim that a court’s application of anothe r state’s law under a choice of law  analysis 
violates the dormant c ommerce clause or that a state unconstitutionally discriminates against an 
out-of-state resident by applying the law of the resident’s home state.  “ [N]aked castings into the 
constitutional sea are not sufficient to command judicial consideration and discussion.”  State v. Johnson, 119 Wn.2d 167, 171, 829 P.2d 1082 (1992)  (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
In re Rosier , 105 Wn.2d 606, 616, 717 P.3d 1353 (1986)) .  The U.S. Supreme Court has explained 
that to avoid “infringing on the policy choices of other States,” a sovereign state’s limit on remedies “must be supported by the State’s interest in protecting its own consumers and its own economy.” BMW of N. Am., Inc. v. Gore , 517 U.S. 559, 572, 116 S. Ct. 1589, 134 L. Ed. 2d 809  
(1996). Far from interfering with interstate commerce or federalism, issue -by-issue analysis 
ensures that choice of law  decisions “further harmonious relations between states” and “facilitate 
commercial intercourse between them.” R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND ) § 6 cmt. d; see Seizer v. Sessions , 
132 Wn.2d 642, 652, 940 P.2d 261 (1997).  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
42 interest in deterring the manufacture and sale of unsafe products within its borders.  
128 Wn. App. at 266.  The case involved an Oregon worker who died in an industrial 
accident involving a machine  that was designed, manufactured, and originally sold 
in Washington .  Id. at 258.   The machine had been operating in Oregon for 8.5 years 
before the accident.  Id. at 259.  If Oregon’s 8 -year statute of repose applied, instead 
of Washington’s presumptive 12-year statute of repose,  it would extinguish  the 
Oregon resident’s claim.    
To determine which state’s law should apply, the court examined the history 
and purpose behind each law .  It noted that the WPLA’s  statute of repose was 2 years 
longer than the UPLA’s 10-year repose period, furthering “a policy of deterrence of 
tortious conduct, and encourag[ing] manufacturers to make safe products for 
consumer s.”  Id.  at 264-65.  In contrast, Oregon’s shorter 8-year repose period aimed 
to protect Oregon businesses and manufacturers from prolonged litigation risks.  The 
court concluded that Washington’s interest in deterring the design, manufacture , and 
sale of unsafe products within its borders outweighed Oregon’s interest in applying 
its shorter statute of repose to protect a Washington corporation.  Id. at 26 6.  
Accordingly, the court concluded the WPLA’s  statute of repose applied .  Id.   
The circumstances here are similar to those in Zenaida -Garcia.  We must  
weigh one state’s interest in limiting the liability of an out- of-state corporation 
against another state’s interest in deterring the design and sale of unsafe products 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
43 within its borders. Significantly, Missouri has no t adopted any statute of repose, a 
decision presumed to be intentional.  As one court observed, “by not enacting a 
statute of repose, Missouri has expressed a policy in favor of fully compensating 
injured victims and a policy against providing asylum to manufacturers of defective 
products.”  Jaurequi v. John Deere Co. , 986 F.2d 170, 175 (7th Cir. 1993).  Missouri 
recognizes that “‘ [t]he primary consideration underlying a statute of repose is 
fairness to a de fendant, [reflecting ] the belief that there comes a time when the 
defendant ought to be secure in his reasonable expectation  that the slate has been 
wiped clean of ancient obligations. ’”  Grosshart v. Kan . City Power & Light Co ., 
623 S.W.3d 160, 168-69 (Mo. Ct. App. 2021)  (emphasis added) (internal quotation  
marks  omitted) (quoting Ambers -Phillips v. SSM DePaul Health C tr., 459 S.W.3d 
901, 908 n.7 (Mo. 2015 )). 
Pharmacia could not have reasonably expected the WPLA’s statute of repose 
to immunize it from liability for tortious conduct committed in Missouri.  Pharmacia marketed and sold PCBs in every state; the place of injury in Washington was merely 
fortuitous.  Moreover, Pharmacia certainly could not have relied on the protections 
of the WPLA because it ceased production of PCBs four years before the WPLA 
was even enacted .  In contrast, Pharmacia could reasonably have anticipate d liability 
to the full extent of M issouri law,  as Missouri is home to its headquarters, medical 
department, marketing, sales, and public relations departments.  All relevant 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
44 decisions concerning PCB design, the discovery of the dangers of PCBs, and the 
decision not to warn consumers were made in Missouri.  
By comparison, Washington can be said to have  minimal interest in applying 
its statute of repose to protect an out-of -state corporation.  This position is consistent 
with other jurisdictions, which have similarly concluded that a state has little interest 
in allowing out -of-state corporations to take advantage of ano ther state’s statute of 
repose.  See, e.g., Mitchell v. Lone Star Ammunition, Inc., 913 F.2d 242, 250 (5th 
Cir. 1990) (finding that there is no “compelling reason” to apply the statute of repose  
from the place of injury in order to bar  claims against out- of-state manufacturers ); 
Mahne v. Ford Motor Co ., 900 F.2d 83, 88 (6th. Cir . 1990)  (finding “no reason” to 
extend the benefits of one state’s statute of repose to an out- of-state defendant) , cert. 
denied, 498 U.S. 941 (1990) ; Marchesani v. Pellerin -Milnor Corp. , 269 F.3d 481, 
489 ( 5th Cir. 2001) (applying the repose period of the manufacturer’s home state, 
Louisiana, to claims brought under Tennessee’s products -liability statute) .  
Pharmacia argues that dépeçage —applying Missouri law to repose and the 
WPLA to liability— is inappropriate in this context.  It contends that the WPLA’s 
“integrated” statute of repose defines the scope of liability and reflects a broader 
legislative policy decision essential to the enactment of the act.  Resp’t ’s Ans wer to 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
45 Amici9 at 18 (“‘[A] statute of repose does not present an issue distinct from the 
underlying claim; it is part of the definition of the claim in much the same way as an 
element of a tort.’” (quoting Br. of Amicus Curiae  Professor Kermit Roosevelt III in 
Supp . of Resp’t  at 16)); see also  Br. of Erin O’Hara O’Connor  et al.10 at 8 (“[S]tate 
polices are reflected in each state’s bundle of relevant laws.”).  However, we do not evaluate statutory conflicts of law differently from those based on common law.  As 
we clearly held in Johnson , choice of law is issue  specific.  When the laws of 
interested states conflict, we apply the law of the state with the most significant relationship to each individual issue , regardless of whether  those issues are found 
within a statute  or under the common law.   
This is not to say that applying another state’s law that  conflicts with the 
WPLA will  always  be appropriate.  But such concern s are properly addressed by 
applying our long -standing  “most significant relationship ” analysis , not by 
collapsing the inquiry into a single choice of law determination under the  statute.  
Here, applying Missouri’s law , we conclude that the absence of a statute of repose 
does not undermine  Washington’s interest s under the WPLA , which include  
preserving consumers ’ rights to recover for injuries and  protect ing retail businesses 
9 Resp’t’s Answer to Brs. of Amici Curiae L. Professors, Former SVEC Students & Their Fams. 
& Mo. L. Experts. 
10 Br. of Erin O’Hara O’Connor, Craig S. Lerner, and Michael E. Solimine as Amici Curiae  in 
Supp. of Def. -Resp’t . 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
46 located primarily within the state.  At the same time, Missouri’s interest in deterring 
tortious conduct within its borders is furthered by applying its own law here.  
Pharmacia has not shown that dépeçage is inappropriate in this case  with respect to 
the issues of liability and repose .   
Taking all of these considerations together, we conclude that Missouri has the 
most significant relationship on the issue of repose, as it s interest in deterring the 
manufacture and sale of unsafe products within its borders outweighs Washington’s 
interest in protecting the tortious conduct of an out-of -state corporation through its 
statute of repose.  See Zenaida -Garcia , 128 Wn. App. at 266.  Accordingly, we 
reverse the Court of Appeals and hold that Missouri law governs this issue.  Because 
we conclude that the WPLA’s statute of repose does not apply, we need not address  
Erickson’s challenge to the  constitutionality  of the WPLA repose provision.  
We next consider which state ’s law applies to the issue of punitive damages.  
2. Missouri has a stronger interest in applying its law on punitive damages 
 
The same analytical framework used in  determining the applicable law on 
repose also applies to the issue of punitive damages.  Under Missouri law, the 
primary purpose of punitive damages is “to punish a defendant for an aggravated act 
of misconduct and to deter similar conduct in the future. ” Rinker v. Ford Motor Co. , 
567 S.W.2d 655, 668 (Mo. Ct. App. 1978 ); see Poage , 523 S.W.3d at 520 (finding 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
47 punitive damages appropriate even when the defendant no longer sells the defective 
product because punitive damages are meant to deter future misconduct and deter 
others who are similarly situated) ; Bradshaw v. Deming , 837 S.W.2d 592, 594 (Mo. 
Ct. App. 1992)  (declaring that punitive damages are not intended to compensate a 
plaintiff; rather, they are meant to punish and deter ).  Restatement (Second) instructs 
that where, as here, the “primary purpose of the tort rule involved is to deter or punish misconduct,” rather than “to compensate the victim for [their] injuries, ” that 
state where the tortious conduct took place may “be the state of dominant interest 
and thus that of  most significant relationship. ”  Id. §§ 145 cmt. c , 171 reporter ’s note 
to cmt. d (one state may have “the dominant interest with respect to the issue of compensatory damages and another state ha[ve] the dominant interest with respect 
to the issue of [punitive] damages”).    
We first awarded punitive damages under the laws of a different state in 
Kammerer .  There, California residents filed claims against a Washington 
corporation for  fraud and  breach of  contract  in connection with a violation of a patent 
licensing agreement negotiated in California.  96 Wn.2d at 418.  California law 
permitted punitive damages whereas Washington law did not.  Id. at 421.  In 
determining which state’s law to apply, we reasoned that California’s interest “in 
deterring fraudulent activities by corporations having a substantial business presence within its borders” outweighed Washington’s interest in protecting corporations that 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
48 commit fraud.  Id . at 422 (quoting Kammere r v. W. Gear Corp. , 27 Wn. App.  512, 
520-21, 618 P.2d 1330 (1980)) .  We  held that “a Washington court can award 
punitive damages under the law of California.”  Id . at 423.  
That same day, we also issued our decision in Barr , where we held that 
Washington law applied to prohibit punitive damages in a dispute between a Florida 
bank and a Washington resident over the bank’s wrongful repossession of a car in 
Washington.  96 Wn.2d 692.  Although the decision to repossess the car occurred in 
Florida , it was the method used to repossess the car that s erved as the basis for the 
claim.   We concluded that “[t] he interest in Florida in providing an example for 
deterrence would not be furthered when the actual conduct and the acts which 
warrant punitive damages were restricted to Nevada and Washington.”  Id. at 699.  
The court’s emphasis on the place of conduct for determining which state 
governs the issue of punitive damages is similarly reflected i n Bryant v. Wyeth , 879 
F. Supp.  2d 1214 ( W.D. Wash. 2012), which we find persuasive.  There,  the plaintiff 
alleged that she developed breast cancer after ingesting hormone replacement 
therapy drugs manufactured by the defendant.   Id. at 1218.  The plaintiff was a 
resident of Washington, where the drugs were prescribed and she ingested them , and 
where she subsequently developed breast cancer.  Id. at 1218 -19.  Although t he drug  
manufacturer was incorporated in Delaware, its headquarters, sales team, and 
women’s health research facili ty were located in Pennsylvania.  Id. at 1219.  The 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
49 plaintiff filed claims for negligence and breach of express warranty under the 
WPLA , along with a fraud claim  seeking punitive  damages under Pennsylvania law.  
Id.  The defendant moved for summary judgment on the issue of punitive damages, 
arguing that Washington law applied .  Id.  
Applying the most significant relationship test, the court held that 
Pennsylvania law governed the issue of punitive damages on the plaintiff’s fraud 
claim .11  Id. at 1225.  The court explained that although the plaintiff suffered her 
personal injury in Washington, the  bulk of the allegedly fraudulent conduct occurred 
at the defendant’s headquarters in Pennsylvania where the company created  its 
product labels  and marketing strategies.  Id. at 1223.  The court emphasized that in 
Pennsylvania, the “ ‘purpose of punitive damages is to punish a tortfeasor for 
outrageous conduct and to deter him or others like him from similar conduct. ’”  Id. 
at 1225 (quoting Hutchison ex rel. Hutchison v. Luddy , 582 Pa. 114, 121 -22, 870 
A.2d 766 (2005) ). The court  highlight ed that this “defendant -focused rationale 
solidifies the place where the conduct occurred as the most significant contact. ”  Id.  
Application of Missouri punitive damages law in this case  is also consistent 
with Johnson , where we recognized that a state’s interest in limiting damages to 
prevent financial burdens and exaggerated claims is “primarily local. ” 87 W n.2d at 
 
11 The plaintiff offered no authority to support extending this holding to her WPLA claims and the 
court therefore declined to do so.  Bryant , 879 F. Supp. 2d at 1220 n.5. 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
50 582-83.  In contrast , a state’s interest in allowing unlimited damages reflects a focus
on penalizing the culpable defendant and “‘ deter[ring] it and others similarly situated 
from such future conduct.’”  Id. at 583 (italics and internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting Hurtado , 11 Cal. 3d at 583 -84). 
Here, as  in Singh , Kammerer , Barr , Bryant , and Johnson , the place where the 
tortious conduct occurred is the most significant factor  in determining which state’s 
law governs the availability of punitive damages .  Erickson filed claims against 
Pharmacia for design defect, construction defect, failure to warn at the time of sale, 
and failure to warn postsale.  The  allegedly tortious behavior that proved these 
claims did not occur in Washington, the place of injury, but in Missouri, the home of Pharmacia’s headquarters.  Pharmacia could not reasonably expect that it would 
be protected from a claim for punitive damages by virtue of doing business in 
Washington.  A company that consciously disregards the safety of people of every 
state can “ have few, if any, justified expectations” that one state’ s laws limiting 
damages may protect it.  R
ESTATEMENT (SECOND ) § 145 cmt. b.    
Applying  Missouri law with respect to the availability of punitive damages , 
even when Washington law governs the substantive elements of liability, 
appropriately advances the distinct policy goals of both states.  Pharmacia’s  tortious 
conduct occurred in Missouri, the place of its corporate  headquarters, medical 
department, and sales and marketing divisions. Missouri’s interest in allowing 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
51 punitive damages —“to  punish a defendant for an aggravated act of misconduct and 
to deter similar conduct in the future ”—is therefore advanced by application of its 
law.  Rinker , 567 S.W.2d at 668.  At the same time, Washington’s policy of ensuring 
full compensation for injury is also fully satisfied.  It is an overstatement to say that 
Washington law  categorically “precludes”  punitive damages.   Suppl. Br. of Resp’t 
at 16.  It recognizes such damages when  the governing law provides for them, and it 
should make no difference whether that governing law is expressed in statute or in 
another state ’s common law that applies to an action brought in Washington.   
Tailoring the application of each state’s law to the issue in which it has the greater 
interest produces a more rational and individualized outcome than applying a single 
law to the entire cause of action.  This issue -by-issue approach is the tr ue 
achievement of Restatement  (Second) .  See  Issue -by-Issue , supra, at 754.   
We hold that Missouri has the most significant relationship with respect to 
punitive damages.  It has a stronger interest in punishing companies for their conscious disregard of safety and deterring others from such actions than 
Washington does in limiting damages imposed on an out -of-state corporation.  See 
Johnson , 87 Wn.2d at 583-84 (The state of the place of injury has “no interest 
applying its [damages] limitation to nonresident defendants.”) . Accordingly, we 
affirm the Court of Appeals and hold that Missouri law governs punitive damages.   

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
52 3. The special verdict form was sufficient to uphold the jury’s award of punitive 
damages under Missouri law  
While t he Court of Appeals correctly recognized that Missouri law governs  
punitive damages in this case , it incorrectly limited  punitive damages to claims 
recognized under Missouri’s  substantive product liability theor ies, despite the 
parties’ agreement that the WPLA governs the liability standards in this case .  
Erickson, 31 Wn. App. 2d at 138.  The court reasoned  that because Missouri does 
not clearly recognize a cause of action for postsale failure to warn, and because the 
jury did not distinguish which particular theory of liability supported punitive 
damages, the jury’s award of punitive damages was unsupported.  Id .  It therefore 
vacated the award and remanded for a jury to consider whether claims recognized 
under Missouri law independently support an award of punitive damages.  Id .   
Erickson argues that  the Court of Appeals erred by not predict ing how 
Missouri courts would decide the issue  of a postsale failure to warn.  Had the Court 
of Appeals done so, Erickson contends it would have found that Missouri courts 
would likely recognize a postsale failure to warn  claim .  Pharmacia responds  that 
deciding this issue of first impression would  “impermissibly impose liability for 
‘conduct that may have been lawful where it occurred.’”  Resp’t ’s Answer to Amici 
at 37 -38 (quoting State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v. Campbell, 538 U.S. 408,  421, 
123 S. Ct. 1513, 155 L. Ed. 2d 585  (2003)).  Pharmacia warns that by permitting 
punitive damages for claims not recognized in Missouri, the court is creating “ a 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
53 previously unknown Frankenstein’s monster that reflects the policies of neither 
Washington nor Missouri and yields a windfall recovery.”  Suppl. Br of Resp’t at 
37-38.
We believe  the focus of the parties’ argument skips over an initial 
consideration  that is dispositive.  Given that the substantive product liability law of 
Washington governs the liability standards here, there is no need to determine  
whether Missouri would recognize a negligence- based claim for postsale failure to 
warn  under its substantive product liability standards.  The jury was properly 
instructed on the WPLA elements of liability , including the elements of a claim for 
postsale failure to warn, and the jury found Pharmacia liable.  The critical question  
for awarding punitive damages under Missouri law is not whether Pharmacia’s 
conduct  would result in liability under Missouri product liability law but, rather , 
whether its conduct reflected “‘complete indifference to or a conscious disregard for 
the safety of others ’” as related to the WPLA claim .  Call v. Heard, 925 S.W.2d 840, 
849 (Mo. 1996)  (quoting Stojkovic v. Weller, 802 S.W.2d 152, 155 (Mo. 1991)) ; see 
also MISSOURI APPROVED JURY INSTRUCTION  10.02.  The jury was instructed on this 
standard and found it was met when it awarded punitive damages.    
The jury instructions on damages provide the guide.  The relevant instructions 
stated:  
A.If you find in favor of a plaintiff under Instruction Number 20
[postsale failure to warn] , and if you believe the conduct of the

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
54 defendant as submitted in Instruction Number 20 showed 
complete indifference to or conscious disregard for the safety of others, or  
B
.I
f you find in favor of a plaintiff under Instruction Number 16
[defective design] , and if you believe :
(1)F
irst, at the time defendant sold the PCBs, defendant knew
of the defective condition and danger submitted in InstructionNumber 16, and(2) Second, the defendant thereby showed complete
indifference to or conscious disregard for the safety of others,o
r
C
.I
f you find in favor of the plaintiff under Instruction Number
18 [failure to warn at the time of distribution] and if you
be
lieve :
(
1)First, at the time defendant sold the PCBs, defendant knew
of the danger submitted in Instruction Number 18 , and
(2) Second, defendant thereby showed complete indifference
to or conscious disregard for the safety of others,
the
n in addition to any damages to which you may find plaintiff entitled 
. . . you may award plaintiff an additional amount as punitive damages 
in such sum as you believe will serve to punish defendant and to deter 
defendant and others f rom like conduct.   
C
lerk’s Papers (CP) at 16549  (jury instruction 30).  The verdict form interrogatory 
on punitive damages asked simply, “Should punitive damages be awarded against 
defendant in the case of plaintiff [name]?”   CP at 16555.  Nothing in the way this 
case was instructed would necessitate the jury parsing the damages among the 
various product liability theories.  Indeed, that would seem  unusual absent a situation 
where not all theories applied to all parties.   Cf. Blanks v. Fluor Corp. , 450 S.W.3d 
308, 364 (Mo. Ct. App. 2014)  (reversing a punitive damages award against one 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
55 partner because the jury instructions required consideration of undifferentiated 
conduct, making it unclear whether the jury would have imposed liability based  
solely on that partner’s  conduct ).   
Pharmacia’s suggestion that it could be made to pay punitive damages for 
conduct that does not give rise to liability in Missouri overlooks that the jury 
properly  found liability under the WPLA.  That finding is the premise for any 
damages.  Importantly, this appeal does not include any challenges to the sufficiency 
of the evidence or to the jury instructions  for misstating Missouri substantive law .  
Nor did Pharmacia argue that Missouri law should govern the substantive law of 
liability.12  We acknowledge that there are likely differences not only between each 
state’s substantive law for postsale failure to warn but also for the other causes of 
action, such as defective design.  We further  recognize  that these differences m ight 
have impacted the outcome of this case.  However, in determining which state’s law 
should apply, we conduct choice of law analysis with respect to each particular issue.  
Like Washington,  Missouri recognizes that different issues may be decided 
according to the laws of different states.  See Wilson v. Image Flooring, LLC , 400 
 
12 Pharmacia argues that Missouri law allows for punitive damages  only when certain procedural 
requirements are met, including a bifurcated trial , an offset of damages , or a  50 percent deposit 
into the state treasury .  Suppl. Br. of Resp’t at 39 -41 (citing MO. REV. STAT. §§ 510.263 (1), (4), 
537.675(3) ).  But in mandating the se requirements  in 2020, Missouri’s “legislature expressly stated 
that ‘[t]he provisions of this act shall apply to causes of action f iled on or after August 28, 2020.’ ”  
Largent v. Pelikan, 628 S.W.3d 162, 165 (Mo. Ct. App. 2021) (alteration in original) (quoting MO. 
REV. STAT. § 510.262) .  As this case was filed in 2018, the statutory requirements, whether 
substantive or procedural, do not apply here.   

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
56 S.W.3d 386, 39 5 (Mo. Ct. App. 2013)  (Missouri applies the most significant 
relationship test  to a “conflict -of-law issue arising in a tort case” ); see, e.g.,  Goede 
v. Aerojet Gen. Corp. , 143 S.W.3d 14, 25 (Mo.  Ct. App.  2004)  (applying California 
law to a manufacturer on liability, but applying Missouri law on damages because 
“Missouri had the predominant interest in the issue of damages for a wrongful death 
occurring within its boundaries”) , abrogated on other grounds by  Sanders v. Ahmed, 
364 S.W.3d 195, 207 (Mo. 2012).   The parties had the opportunity to argue that 
Missouri substantive law should apply but did not do so.  
The jury made  proper findings under both Washington and Missouri law  in 
accordance with the given instructions.  We reverse the Court of Appeals  and hold 
that the special verdict form  was sufficient to sustain  the jury’s award of punitive 
damages.   
We next turn to Pharmacia’s challenge to the verdict based on the trial court’s 
admission of expert opinion testimony.  
II. Admissibility of Expert Testimony 
To be admissible in Washington courts, scientific expert testimony must 
satisfy both Frye , 293 F. 1013, and ER 702.  Lakey v. Puget Sound Energy, Inc ., 176 
Wn.2d 909, 918, 296 P.3d 860 (2013).  Frye requires that the  underlying scientific 
theory and methodology support ing an expert’s testimony  be “generally accepted in 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
57 the relevant scientific community and capable of producing reliable results.”  Id .  
However, “ Frye does not require every deduction drawn from generally accepted 
theories to be generally accepted.”  Anderson v. Akzo Nobel Coatings, Inc ., 172 
Wn.2d 593, 611, 260 P.3d 857 (2011). Nor is unanim ous acceptance and usage in 
the relevant scientific community required.  Id.  at 603.  Instead, Frye  focuses on 
whether the underlying theory or method has general scientific consensus.  Lakey , 
176 Wn.2d at  920.   
ER 702 requires t he trial court to determine that the testimony will assist the 
trier of fact.  Id.  at 918.  Unreliable testimony, including testimony from an expert 
who fails to adhere to an otherwise reliable methodology, is generally regarded as 
unhelpful and therefore inadmissible.  Id . at 918- 19.  We review ER 702 rulings for 
abuse of discretion, and Frye  rulings de novo.  L.M. v. Hamilton, 193 Wn.2d 113, 
118, 436 P.3d 803 (2019).  Under Frye , “[t]he reviewing court will undertake a 
searching review which may extend beyond the record” and involve consideration 
of scientific literature, secondary legal authority, and materials that were not 
available until after a Frye  hearing.  State v. Copeland, 130 Wn.2d 244, 255 -56, 922 
P.2d 1304 (1996) (citing State v. Cauthron, 120 Wn.2d 879, 887-88, 846 P.2d 502 (1993)).   
At issue are the expert opinions of industrial hygienist Kevin Coghlan, whose 
testimony Erickson relied on to show that the teachers  were likely exposed to injury-

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
58 causing levels of PCBs during the time they taught at SVEC.  Pharmacia urges us to 
affirm the Court of Appeals and hold that Coghlan’s opinions —based  on two 
different methods of back-calculation —should  have been excluded under Frye , ER 
702, or both.  The re is no dispute that Coghlan’s third method, which estimates 
exposure by directly comparing to New York schools, does not implicate Frye  and 
satisfies ER 702 .   
A.The practice of exposure reconstruction is generally accepted in the field
of industrial hygiene
On
e of the primary functions of an industrial hygienist is estimating worker 
exposure to chemical and physical agents.  Industrial hygienists often collaborate 
with other disciplines, including toxicologists and epidemiologists , to make these 
risk assessments.  While these other professionals are experts in assessing the health 
effects of exposure, “[d]etermination of the actual exposure is the stock- in-trade of 
industrial hygienists.”  Suppl . Rec. (SR) at 6667  (emphasis omitted) .  When real-
time measuremen ts of exposure cannot be conducted, industrial hygienists attempt 
to estimate past exposure levels using what is known as “exposure reconstruction.” 
Id. at 6774.  Exposure reconstruction may involve  multiple quantitative and 
qualitative estimation methods to arrive at a range of possible exposures for each 
worker .  The specific methods used depend on the available data and the intended 
use of the  final estimation.  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
59 The parties do not appear to dispute that the overall practice of exposure 
reconstruction is generally accepted in the field of industrial hygiene.  See  Suppl . Br. 
of Pet’rs , App. 22 (attaching findings of fact and conclusions of law regarding 
Coghlan opinions in Rose Order ).  Our Frye analysis focuses on the two specific 
methods Coghlan used as part of his exposure reconstruction : (1) back -calculation 
from carpet samples and (2) back-calculation based on the EPA study of New York 
schools . 
B. Coghlan’s PCB estimates using carpet samples from SVEC and partition 
coefficients from the Guo study satisfies Frye  and ER 702  
 
 Coghlan’s back- calculation of PCB s using carpet samples relies  on a concept 
known as “source -sink dynamics.”  S ource -sink dynamics is used to understand how 
particles (e.g. , PCBs) migrate from an original  source (e.g. , light ballasts) to 
materials that absorb them, known as sinks (e.g. , carpet).  Some objects can act as 
both a sink and a secondary source, re -emitting particles after they have been 
absorbed.   
The parties do not dispute that the theory of source -sink dynamics is generally 
accepted in the relevant scientific communities.  See Erickson , 31 Wn. App. 2d at 
152.  Specifically, they do not dispute that light ballasts are a source emitting PCBs, 
that carpet acts as  a sink absorbing PCBs, and that air can function  both as a sink 
and a secondary source of PCBs.  Nor do th e parties contest  that mathematical 
models  can be developed to describ e the rate at which sources emit PCBs and sinks 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
60 absorb them under specific conditions.  Rather, Pharmacia contends that Coghlan’s 
method of reversing these models to use  PCB concentrations in carpet (a sink) to 
estimate past concentrations of PCBs in the air (a source) is not generally accepted.   
 Coghlan’s method relies heavily on the work of an EPA study published in 
2012  known as the Guo study.  This study examined how common building 
materials, including two types of carpet, absorb PCBs from the air in a controlled 
laboratory environment.  The experiment used two connected chambers.  In the first 
chamber, PCB -containing caulk acted as a stable source of PCBs, emitting the 
chemicals  into clean air pumped in from one side.  Fans  then directed this air to flow 
into the second chamber, where the air  acted as a secondary source of PCBs to be 
absorbed by small buttons of each building material.  Throughout the test , scientists  
monitored PCB concentrations in the outlet air and periodically removed the buttons 
of building material to test their PCB concentrations.  The study calculated the 
partition coefficient for each material, representing the ratio between the PCB 
concentration in the material and the PCB concentration in the surrounding air at the 
end of the experiment .  In a section describing the study’s limits , the study noted the 
wide variety of building materials used in the real world and cautioned that “care 
should be  taken when applying the test results to seemingly similar materials in real-
world situations.”  SR at 4736- 37.  

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
61  Coghlan acquired several samples of carpet from SVEC , which had been 
collected in December 2015 by Dr. Cynthia Yost, a former science teacher at the 
school.  Dr. Yost collected the samples just before the school’s carpet  was replaced  
and prior to the start of  PCB remediation.  She stored them in plastic sandwich bags 
inside brown paper bags in her basement from 2016 until January 2019,  when she 
provided  them to Coghlan.   
Coghlan used the SVEC carpet samples along with data from the Guo study 
to estimate past PCB concentrations in the air at SVEC .  Coghlan first measured  the 
PCB concentrations in each sample, excluding one that showed clear evidence of 
direct contamination by PCB -containing oil leaked from a light ballast.  He  divided 
his measured PCB concentration s by the PCB concentrations  measured in the carpets 
in the Guo study, then multiplied by the known concentration of PCBs in the air 
from the Guo study.  The result is the  PCB concentration that likely had to be in the 
air at SVEC for the carpet samples to have absorbed the measured concentrations by 
the time the samples were collected, assuming the SVEC carpet was similar in 
absorbency to one of the carpets in the Guo study.  Coghlan  repeated this calculation 
with each SVEC carpet sample measurement and each carpet sample from the Guo 
study to produce a range of estimated PCB concentrations in the air at SVEC.  
Stated differently , Coghlan  applied the findings of the Guo study in reverse.  
The Guo study used a known concentration of PCBs in air as a source and a known 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
62 concentration of PCBs in building materials as a sink to calculate the partition 
coefficient.  Coghlan used a known concentration of PCBs in a sink and a known 
partition coefficient to calculate the concentration of PCBs in a source —specifically, 
the air at SVEC.   
 During  cross -examination, Coghlan admitted that to his knowledge, no one 
had ever used a carpet sample to back- calculate the historic concentration of PCBs 
in the air, nor had anyone published a peer -reviewed study involving that specific 
method.  This admission appears to be the primary factor for the Court of Appeals 
conclusion that his method was novel and not generally accepted.  See Erickson , 31 
Wn. App. 2d at 152- 53.  On appeal, however, we have the benefit of reviewing the 
Frye hearing conducted in Rose , where the trial court found that using the PCB 
concentration in material samples to estimate prior PCB concentration in the air is 
generally accepted.  
 In Rose, the court heard from Dr. Lars Gunnarsen, a professor whose research 
focuses on the risk of PCBs in indoor environments.  He  testified that “[p]artition 
coefficients are well established, and we use them all the time.”  SR at 4232, 6614.  Asked how he would estimate PCBs in the air from a sample of clothing, he replied, “I would look —look at my paper and find a reasonable partitioning coefficient, and 
then I would quantify the PCB content of the clothing and calculate back to the air.”  Id. at 4232 .  Dr. Brent Altemose, a certified industrial hygienist, similarly testified 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
63 that “many industrial hygienists” use partition coefficients to estimate historic 
exposure without even knowing the term “partition coefficient,” and that if he were 
to try and calculate the air concentration of PCBs from a sink sample, he “would 
look in t he literature to see if there was a partitioning coefficient that had been 
determined” for the same material.  Id .  at 4255, 7419.  Likewise, Dr. John Price, 
another certified industrial hygienist, testified that he had “done a lot of work in the 
past of taking samplings and doing estimates” to determine “preexisting exposures 
without controls.”  Id. at 4246, 6653.   
 The supplemental record also contains multiple peer -reviewed studies 
involving back-calculation of chemical concentrations in air using measurements of 
different objects.  For example, after 9/11, researchers used the “film -air partition 
coefficient” to estimate  PCB levels in the air using measurements of window film.  
Id. at 6567.  Other researchers used “previously published wood-air partition 
coefficients” to estimate air concentrations of different chemical compounds using measurements of tree cores.  Id . at 6578.  Lastly, one study calculated partition 
coefficients using carpet as a sink but studied chemical compounds other than PCBs.  
Id. at 7612.  
 Pharmacia does not meaningfully dispute this testimony and the scientific 
literature, instead focusing narrowly on the lack of evidence that anyone  before 
Coghlan  specifically used carpet samples as the sink and PCBs as the chemical 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
64 compound, or  that anyone has  relied on the Guo study, for exposure reconstruction.  
Pharmacia cites  the testimony of Dr. Nadia Moore, the sole industrial hygienist it 
called at the Frye  hearing, who  testified that Coghlan’s method was not generally 
accepted .  When asked why, Dr. Moore, who has been an industrial hygienist only 
since 2020 , stated  that she “did a search” and “couldn’t find anywhere that anyone 
had used carpet in peer -reviewed literature to back calculate PCBs.”  Id . at 4326.  
Pharmacia’s  other  witness, Dr. Kurt Herman, contradicted Dr. Moore when he  
admitted that the use of partition coefficients to estimate the concentration of a 
chemical compound in the air is “generally accepted.”  Id . at 4371.   
Pharmacia analogizes this case to Lake Chelan Shores Homeowners Ass'n v. 
St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins urance  Co., 176 Wn. App. 168, 313 P.3d 408 (2013), 
which also involved back- calculation.  There,  the plaintiff’s expert measured a 
home’s  curre nt wood rot and applied a formula to estimate when, in the past, the rot 
had reached a condition that would cause the home to collapse.  Id. at 174.  The court 
acknowledged that while using exponential curves to model the progression of wood 
rot was generally accepted,  applying such models to back-calculate wood rot was 
not.  Id. at 179.  The court rejected the expert’s claim that this approach was generally 
accepted,  emphasizing  that the expert failed to provide supporting evidence for the 
use of any formula —let alone the specific formula he used— to backdate the onset 
of a collapse condition.  Id.  Although the expert’s methodology in Lake Chelan may 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
65 bear a general resemblance to  the partition coefficients  at issue here , it lacked  an 
equivalent to the Guo study or to the established practice of using partition 
coefficients in exposure reconstruction.   
 The weight of  expert  testimony and peer -reviewed literature in the relevant 
scientific communities—industrial hygiene, environmental engineering, and 
research involving PCBs— demonstrates that using partition coefficients to estimate 
historic concentrations of chemical compoun ds in the air from concentrations in 
tangible objects is generally accepted.  Frye requires no more than this.  See 
Anderson , 172 Wn.2d at 611 (rejecting the argument that a plaintiff had to prove 
acceptance of the “specific causal connection” between the “specific toxic organic 
solvent s” and the “specific polymicrogyria birth defect”).  Frye  does not require 
acceptance of “each discrete and ever more specific part of an expert opinion.”  Id.  
Instead, it simply requires that the underlying theory and the methodology be 
generally accepted.  Because Coghlan’s testimony is based on the well-established 
use of partition coefficients, it satisfies the Frye  standard.  
 For similar reasons, Coghlan’s testimony also meets the requirements of  ER 
702.  Since his method has been demonstrated to be reliable,  the remaining questions 
under ER 702 are whether his opinion would be  helpful to the jury and whether he 
reliably applied his methods to the specific data at issue.  Coghlan’s opinion is 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
66 helpful to the jury because it estimates the historic PCB exposure at SVEC , which is 
necessary to prove causation of Erickson’s injury.   
 Pharmacia raises several arguments about why Coghlan’s method is not 
reliable or reliably applied, but these arguments properly go to the weight of his 
testimony, not its admissibility.  Pharmacia points to the Guo study’s cautionary 
statement that “care should be taken when apply ing the test results to seemingly 
similar materials in real- world situations.”  SR at 4736- 37.  However,  Coghlan 
acknowledges the assumptions underlying his methods, including that all PCBs in 
the carpet samples were absorbed from the air, despite the presence of other potential sources at SVEC.  To address this, he excluded from his calculations one carpet 
sample that had clear evidence of direct exposure to ballast oil and noted that the 
high PCB concentrations of two other samples may reflect tracking of PCBs on to 
the carpet (e.g. , from people’s shoes) rather than only absorption from the air.  
 Pharmacia also argues that the reliability of the carpet samples is 
compromised because they were collected by Dr. Yost, stored in her basement for 
two years, and later transferred to Coghlan for testing, raising concerns about the 
possibility of  cross contamination.  However,  Coghlan acknowledged this possibility 
and accounted for it by testing the storage containers for any signs of cross  
contamination.  He also noted  that Dr. Yost stored each sample in a separate plastic 
bag, double bagged inside paper bags, which enhanced their integrity .    

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
67 Pharmacia further challenges Coghlan’s assumption that the PCB 
concentration in the Guo  study’s carpet samples had reached equilibrium with the 
concentration in the air, even though the experiment ran for only 240 hours. But 
Coghlan acknowledges that had the carpet samples been allowed to reach equilibrium, the partition coefficients, and thus his es timated air concentrations, 
likely would have been higher.  In fact, the Guo study conducted a separate experiment where samples were expos ed for 507 hours, resulting in PCB 
concentrations in one of the two carpet samples that were roughly double those 
observed at 240 hours.  
Lastly, Coghlan’s method assumes that the carpet at SVEC has similar 
absorbent qualities to one of the carpet samples used in the Guo study.  T estimony 
from other industrial hygienists confirms that this is a necessary assumption in any 
exposure reconstruction.  As Dr. Gunnarsen, the professor who testified in Rose , 
explained, his first step in any exposure reconstruction would be to consult relevant 
literature for a “reasonable partition coefficient” of a comparable material.  Id. at 
4232.  Coghlan reason ably assumed that the carpet at SVEC was at least as absorbent 
as the le ast absorbent carpet sample  in the Guo study and no more absorbent than 
the most  absorbent carpet sample .  Moreover, he presented his estimates as a range 
of possible air concentrations in SVEC, rather than testifying to a level of scientific 
certainty beyond what his method allowed.   

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
68 We conclude that the identified criticisms of Coghlan’s testimony go to its 
weight and not its admissibility, and that the trial court did not err in finding that 
Coghlan reliably applied his method, satisfying ER 702.  
C.Coghlan’s estimation using protection factors from the Thomas st udy
s
atisfies Frye  and ER 702
For this back -calculation method, Coghlan relied on another  EPA study , 
known as the Thomas study,  that measured the air concentrations of PCBs in six 
New York City schools both before and after remediation efforts to reduce PCB 
exposure.  All of the schools were built between 1950 and 1978, a period when the use of PCB -containing caulk and light ballasts was common.  Coghlan calculated 
the percentage by which remediation reduced PCB air concentrations— known as 
the protection factor —by dividing the postreme diation concentration for each school 
by its preremediation concentration .  He then divided the postremediation air 
concentrations measured at SVEC by this protection factor to estimate the preremediation air concentrations at SVEC.   
All of  the industrial hygienists who testified at the Frye  hearing  in Rose , 
including Pharmacia’s witness, acknowledged that the use of protection factors derived from remediation efforts is a generally accepted method of both exposure reconstruction and predicting the effectiveness of future remediation.  Dr. Price 
testified that he was not “aware of any industrial hygienists who have disagreement 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
69 on the concept of adjusting pos tremediation levels to estimate preremediation levels 
of an airborne contaminant using another site.”  Id.  at 4252.  Dr. Alt emose testified 
that he uses protection factors “a couple of times a month” to predict the effect of 
remediation techniques and that he uses them “to reconstruct exposure” after a 
“remedial effort has been made.”  Id.  at 4256.  Further,  Pharmacia’s witness  Dr. 
Moore testified that using postremediation levels to estimate preremediation levels “can be done , but in order to use one site as another site, you need to characterize 
that those sites are equivalent.”  Id . at 4334.  The American Industrial Hygiene 
Association  also endorses the use of protection factors in exposure reconstruction, 
and the Occupational Health and Safety Administration  uses them to predict the 
effectiveness of remediation techniques.  See id . at 6805; 8765.  
 While Pharmacia elicited some testimony critical of this method and 
Coghlan’s use of protection factors , none came  from an industrial hygienist.  Unlike 
the method using carpet samples, which draws on broader principles like source -
sink dynamics  shared with other disciplines like environmental engineering, the use 
of protection factors fits squarely in the field of industrial hygiene, so testimony from experts in other fields is not relevant.  For example, Dr. Herman declined to answer whether the use of protection factors is generally accepted in the field of industrial 
hygiene because he is “not an industrial hygienist so [he] can’t speak to that.”  Id. at 
4372.   

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
70 Pharmacia argues that Coghlan did not demonstrate general acceptance of the 
use of protection factors from schools (or specifically from the Thomas study) to 
estimate preremediation air concentrations of PCBs.  These arguments frame the 
analysis of general acceptance too narrowly and echo Pharmacia’s criticisms of the 
back -calculation method based on carpet samples, overlooking that Frye  does not 
require acceptance of “each discrete and ever more specific part of an expert opinion.”  Anderson, 172 Wn.2d at 611.  W e conclude that Coghlan’s use of 
protection factors to estimate preremediation concentrations of PCBs is generally 
accepted within the relevant field of industrial hygiene.  
This method of back- calculation based on the Thomas study also satisfies ER 
702, as the trial court here and in Rose concluded .  As with the method based on 
carpet samples, it is helpful to the jury because it estimates PCBs air concentrations 
for which no direct measurement exists.  Pharmacia’s arguments all go to the weight of Coghlan’s testimony, not its admissibility.  
Pharmacia primarily argues that Coghlan did not sufficiently show that the 
New York schools were similar to SVEC.  But Pharmacia appears to require a level of identicalness that industrial hygienists would not require in order to consider the method relia bly applied.  Its witness John Woodyard— whose experience “‘loosely’ ” 
fits in the field of “‘ environmental engineering’ ” and whom the Rose  court found 
too biased to be credible, Rose  Order at 15 —testified that one would first need to 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
71 make sure variables such as the size of the classrooms and ventilation systems are 
“identical between schools” in order to use this method.  SR at 4356.  Dr. Herman, 
an environmental engineer and geologist, also testified in Rose  that one would need 
to confirm that the sequence of remediation techniques used at both schools were 
similar, but when asked to explain what effect that would have on the air 
concentrations after the full remediation process was complete, he could not point 
to any specific effect.   
 In this case, Coghlan testified that the factors relevant to exposure 
reconstruction —the PCB sources used in the schools and the remediation techniques 
used to remove those sources— were similar.  Additionally, as he did with the 
method based on carpet samples, Coghlan  ran his calculations using  the two schools 
in the Thomas study with the highest and lowest protection factors to produce a range 
of possible preremediation air concentrations at SVEC.  His testimony supports a 
fair inference that SVEC shares a general similarity with other public schools built 
during the era of widespread PCB use, and that the remediation efforts at SVEC were 
at least as effective as the least effective remediation in the New York schools but no more effective than the most ef fective remediation.  For these reasons, we  
conclude that the trial court reasonably concluded  that Coghlan demonstrated 
sufficient similarity between the schools to show that he reliably applied this method of estimation using protection factors.  We reve rse the Court of Appeals and hold 

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1  
72 that the trial court did not err  in admitting Coghlan’s testimony based on both back-
calculation methods.    
CONCLUSION  
This case presents important questions involving  both Washington’s choice 
of law analysis and the framework for evaluating the admissibility of expert 
testimony.  We conclude that the trial court properly applied Washington’s  choice 
of law principles and properly admitted expert testimony.    
When a party raises an actual conflict of substantive law, Washington courts 
apply the law of the state with the most significant relationship to that particular 
issue.  Under  this test, Missouri law applies to govern the issues of  repose  and 
punitive damages .  With respect to punitive damages under Missouri law,  it is not 
necessary to consider whether Missouri would recognize a claim for postsale failure to warn.  This is because t he jury’s finding of liability under Washington substantive 
product law is sufficien t to sustain a punitive damage s award where the jury finds 
that Missouri’s heightened standard of wrongful conduct is met.  
Under Washington standards governing the admissibility of expert testimony, 
the trial court properly applied both Frye  and ER 702 and held that Coghlan’s 
testimony was admissible.   

Erickson v. Pharmacia, No. 103135-1 
73 Accordingly, we reverse the Court of Appeals in part and hold that a new trial 
is not warranted.  We  reinstate the  jury’s verdict and remand to the trial court for any 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.   
WE CONCUR: 
___________________________ ____________________________ 
____________________________ ____________________________ 
____________________________ ____________________________ 
____________________________ ____________________________ ______________________________


Erickson v. Pharmacia LLC  
1 No.
 103135-1 
GORDON McCLOUD, J. (dissenting) —Washington’s substantive law —the 
Washington product liability act (W PLA ), ch. 7.72 RCW —applies to the products 
liability claims in this case. The parties agree on this point. Pet. f or Rev . at 8-9; 
Answer to Pet. for Rev . at 14. The majority does too. Majority at 51.  
The WPLA contains an explicit statute of repose. RCW 7.72.060. As the 
C
ourt of Appeals explained, statutes of repose are part of the substantive law: they 
define whether a claim ever arises in the first place. Erickson  v. Pharmacia , LLC, 
31 Wn. App. 2d 100, 119, 548 P.3d 226 (2024) (citing Rice v. Dow  Chem.  Co., 124 
Wn.2d 205, 212, 875 P.2d 1213 (1994)); accord Goad  v. Celotex  Corp. , 831 F.2d 
508, 511 (4th Cir. 1987)  (“Statutes  of repose  make  the filing  of suit within  a 
specified time a substantive  part of plaintiff’s  cause  of action.”  (citing  Bolick  v. 
Am. Barmag  Corp. , 306 N.C. 364, 293 S.E. 2d 415 (1982)) ). Thus, “ [f]or a WPLA 
claim to exist, the plaintiff must satisfy the statute’s integrated statute of repose.”  
Erickson, 31 Wn. App. 2d at 125. 
The WPLA’s statute of repose bars claims after the expiration of the 
pr
oduct’s useful safe life, presumptively set at 12 years. RCW 7.72.060. That’s 

Erickson v. Pharmacia LLC, No. 103135-1 
(Gordon McCloud, J., dissenting)  
2 what the plain language of the statute says.1 Under applicable rules of statutory 
interpretation, that’s what the Washington L egislature intended. Dep’t of Ecology  
v.Campbell & Gwinn,  LLC, 146 Wn.2d 1, 9-10, 43 P.3d 4 (2002)  (courts mus t
give effect to a statute’s plain meaning as an expression of legislative intent if the 
statute’s meaning is plain on its face).  
I therefore disagree with the majority’s decision to say that the WPLA 
provides the substantive law on liability in this case but then discard the WPLA’s 
explicit, claim -defining statute of repose and choose Missouri’s lack of a statute of 
repose instead.  
As the Court of Appeals correctly explained, the statute’s plain language 
shows that the legislature intended the statute of repose to apply to the full chapter 
1 (1) Useful safe life. (a) . . . [A] product seller shall not be subject to 
liability to a claimant for harm under this chapter if the product seller 
proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the harm was caused after the product’s “useful safe life” had expired. 
“Useful safe
 life” begins at the time of delivery of the product and  
extends for the time during which the product would normally be likely to perform or be stored in a safe manner. . . . 
. . . .
 
(2) P
resumption regarding useful safe life. If the harm was caused m ore
than twelve 
years after the time of delivery, a presumption arises that the 
harm was caused after the useful safe life had expired.  This presumption may only be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence. 
RCW 7.72
.060. 

Erickson v. Pharmacia LLC, No. 103135-1 
(Gordon McCloud, J., dissenting)  
3 in which it appears as an integral part of a WPLA claim. Erickson , 31 Wn. App. 2d 
at 121 -22 & n.10. As with all statutes of repose, the WPLA’s statute of repose 
reflects careful legislative balancing of competing policy concerns. Id.  at 121- 22 
(citing Bennett v. United States , 2 Wn.3d 430, 454, 539 P.3d 361 (2023)). When 
crafting the WPLA, the legislature was concerned with two important policies: 
“‘protecting Washington industries from excessive litigation, and preserving the right of consumers to seek redress for injuries caused by unsafe products.’” Id.  at 
122 (quoting Zenaida-Garcia  v. Recovery  Sys. Tech.,  Inc., 128 Wn. App. 256, 264, 
115 P.3d 1017 (2005)). The legislature balanced these interests in the statute of 
repose, which cuts off liability after a product’s “useful safe life,” thereby 
protecting manufacturers and sellers from indefinite exposure. By creating a 
rebuttable presumption that a product’s useful safe life expires after 12  years, the 
WPLA reflects a deliberate balance between allowing injured parties a fair 
opportunity to bring claims and ensuring predictability and finality for product 
sellers. Id. If the harm was caused after the useful safe life expired, then the  
plaintiff has no WPLA claim. Thus, the statute of repose is “integrated” into the 
WPLA “such that it is fundamental to the existence of a claim.” Id. at 123.  
The majority, however, bases its decision on the assumption t hat the 
WPLA’s statute of repose is not fundamental to the existence of a WPLA claim 

Erickson v. Pharmacia LLC, No. 103135-1 
(Gordon McCloud, J., dissenting)  
4 and does not represent a legislative directive about choice of law at all. T he 
majority therefore discards the WPLA’s explicit statute of repose in favor of 
Missouri law, which contains no statute of repose at all for product liability claims. 
Majority at 28.  
The majority first acknowledges that the laws of Washington and Missouri 
conflict on this point. Id.  at 27. I agree. Under Restatement (Second) of Conflict of 
Laws  (Am. L . Inst. 1971) , once a conflict is identified, the court must follow any 
explicit or implicit statutory directive on choice of law. Id. at 13.2 I agree with this, 
also. But the majority then asserts that the WPLA’s language provides “no 
evidence” that the legislature “intended to provide courts with a directive on choice of law” for repose. Id. at 29. Thus, it concludes that following Johnson v.  Spider 
Staging’s
3 issue -by-issue approach to choice of law and then  applying  Missouri’s 
law on repose does not conflict with the WPLA’s statutory language. Id. at 31 .  
I respectfully disagree  with those latter  points  (that there’s no evidence the 
legislature intended the WPLA statute of repose to prevail on choice of law and 
2 I also note that under Restatement (Second), “‘[p]rovided it is constitutional to do 
so, the court will apply a local statute in the manner intended by the legislature even 
when the local law of another state would be applicable under usual choice-of-law 
principles.’” Erickson, 31 Wn. App. 2d at 122 n.10 (alteration in original) (quoting 
RESTATEMENT (SECOND ) § 6 cmt. b). 
3 87 Wn.2d 577, 580, 555 P.2d 997 (1976). 

Erickson v. Pharmacia LLC, No. 103135-1 
(Gordon McCloud, J., dissenting)  
5 hence that choosing Missouri law does not conflict with the WPLA’s clear statute 
of repose language) . As to the first point, t here is a wealth of evidence that the 
legislature “intended to provide courts with a directive on choice of law” for repose 
for WPLA claims. Id. at 29. T he Court of Appeals correctly explained  that the 
language of the WPLA statute of repose shows legislative intent to make “the statute of repose mandatory to the existence of a WPLA claim.” Erickson, 31 Wn. 
App. 2d at 123. That makes the WPLA’s statute of repose a legislative directive —
courts must apply the WPLA statute of repose to determine whether a WPLA 
claim exists. As to the second point, given that clear statutory language, the 
majority errs in  concluding  that applying Missouri’s law on repose does not 
conflict with the WPLA’s statutory language . Majority at 31. Actually, the 
WPLA’s statutory language shows that Missouri’s total lack of a statute of repose 
for product liability claims conflicts directly with the WPLA.  
The majority defends its conclusion on these points by relying extensively 
on a Court of Appeals opinion, Zenaida -Garcia . Majority at 40- 41 (citing Zenaida -
Garcia, 128 Wn. App. at 266). But that case is not controlling, and, as the Court of Appeals here pointed out, it is not clear that the WPLA provided the substantive 
law on liability in that case at all. Erickson , 31 Wn. App. 2d at 121 n.9.  

Erickson v. Pharmacia LLC, No. 103135-1 
(Gordon McCloud, J., dissenting)  
6 The majority also relies on this court’s decision in Rice for that analysis and 
conclusion.  Majority at 17 (citing Rice, 124 Wn.2d at 207 ). But that reliance is 
unjustified for the same reason: in Rice, it was also unclear whether the WPLA 
applied, and the parties had not briefed it; this court ultimately determined that 
Oregon law on liability applied and that the claim was barred by the Oregon statute 
of repose. Erickson, 31 Wn. App. 2d at 121 n.9 (citing Rice, 124 Wn.2d at 21 7).  
Thus, the courts in Zenaida -Garcia and Rice “were not asked to consider the 
specific question we are faced with here: whether the court should apply a separate 
choice -of-law analysis to the statute of repose in WPLA from the choice of law 
governing the substantive product liability claim.” Id . at 119. I agree with  the 
Court of Appeals ; I am not convinced that in a case like this one where “there is no 
dispute as to which substantive product liability law applies, any other state’s 
statute of repose could supplant the claim -defining statute of repose in WPLA.” Id . 
at 121.  
To be sure, the majority’s application of the “most significant relationship 
test” certainly finds support in our early decision in Johnson . 87 Wn.2d at 583-84 
(applying the “most significant relationship” test to determine whether to apply 
Washington or Kansas law on damages in a wrongful death action).  But I disagree 
that the majority should have reached that test at all as to the issue of repose —

Erickson v. Pharmacia LLC, No. 103135-1 
(Gordon McCloud, J., dissenting)  
7 because the plain language of the WPLA makes clear that the WPLA’s statute of 
repose  inheres in all WPLA claims, so we must apply the WPLA statute of repose, 
not some other state’s law on repose (or lack thereof). The majority’s contrary 
decision conflicts with our basic rule of statutory construction, that is, to determine 
the intent of the legislature first and foremost from the language  that it used. 
Campbell & Gwinn, 146 Wn.2d at 9-10.  
By straying from the WPLA’s plain language and clear legislative intent, the 
m
ajority is left with the task of balancing competing policy preferences.  
But c o urts are not supposed to start their analysis with policy preferences 
when there’s a state statute right on point. And there’s no denying that the WPLA’s 
explicit, detailed, and somewhat unique statute of repose is the statute right on 
point. It uses broad  language  to refer  to the beneficiaries  of the statute  of repose:  “a 
product seller shall not be subject to liability to a claimant for harm under this c
hapter.” RCW 7.72.060 (emphasis added) . This broad language suggests that the 
statute of repose “applies to every product seller and to every claim brought under 
the WPLA.” Majority at 30 (emphasis added) (citing Appellant Pharmacia LLC’s 
Reply Br. at 12, 19, Erickson v. Pharmacia LLC  (Wash. Ct. App No. 83287-5-I 
(2022) )); accord  Erickson , 31 Wn. App. 2d at 123. The fact that the WPLA statute 

Erickson v. Pharmacia LLC, No. 103135-1 
(Gordon McCloud, J., dissenting)  
8 of repose  appears right in the WPLA (as opposed to appearing in some other more 
general section) provide s only further support for that point in this case.   
I do not dispute the majority’s explanation that “[s]cholars” have coined a 
fancy word to promote  the process sometimes, but not always,  of taking one 
element from one state’s definition of a claim , taking  another element from another 
state’s definition of a claim , and calling it statutory interpretation. Majority at 20.  
But we’re not dealing with a law review article here. We’re dealing with 
difficult legislative judgments, by legislators with perhaps differing policy 
priorities, expressed in statutes written by perhaps imperfect human beings. And 
we’re trying to apply those legislative decisions to a terrible mass tort for which a variety of actors likely bear blame. I don’t think that the language that the 
Washington Legislature chose to put into the WPLA on repose can support the 
majority’s decision, despite the fancy  word that might support such picking and 
choosing  elements from different states’ laws in other situations.  
And to be fair to the scholars who coined that term , they did not mean to 
apply it in every situation. The majority acknowledges this. It appropriately 
recognizes that “dépeçage  is inappropriate ‘when used to fragment issues related to 
a common purpose or to legitimize a smorgasbord approach which inures only to 

Erickson v. Pharmacia LLC, No. 103135-1 
(Gordon McCloud, J., dissenting)  
9 the benefit of the party picking and choosing.’” Majority at 21- 22 (quoting 
Johnson v. Con t’l Airlines Corp ., 964 F.2d 1059, 1064 (10 th Cir. 1992)).   
But the majority did not actually apply this limitation. I would. I would 
affirm the Court of Appeals decision that the WPLA itself defines the claim and 
defines the statute of repose. I would also affirm the Court of Appeals decision that 
that statute of repose survives constitutional scrutiny (for the reasons that the Court 
of Appeals states) . And I would remand to the trial court for further proceedings, 
just as the Court of Appeals did.  
I therefore respectfully dissent. 
___________________________ 
_______________________
__________________________